Amy Nelson Burnett Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances

and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture in the Six-

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the
Shaping of Religious Culture in the Sixteenth Century

von Amy Nelson Burnett

The Reformation was fully settled in Switzerland by the early 1530s. That, at
least, is the impression given by the critical editions of sources concerning the
Reformation published in the later nineteenth and early twentieth century.
Strickler’s six volumes of documents on the Swiss Reformation end in 1532,
as does Steck and Tobler’s source collection for the Reformation in Bern. 1
Egli’s volume of sources on Zurich goes no further than 1533. 2 The six vol-
umes of documents dealing with the Basel Reformation cover the longest
period, extending up to the publication of that city’s ofﬁcial confession in
early 1534. 3 The unsuspecting observer might conclude from these published
editions that once the Reformation had been ofﬁcially adopted and the larger
political questions settled in the wake of the Second Kappel War, the most in-
teresting phase of the Reformation had come to an end.

This assumption may reﬂect the viewpoint of the generation of scholars
who produced these critical editions, but it does not correspond to the view
generally accepted today. The distinction once made between «the Reforma-
tion»  and  «the  confessional  era»  has  proven  to  be  problematic  once  one
moves away from the political settlements that granted legal status to the
Protestant  churches  to  consider  broader  changes  to  social  structures  and
mentalities. What was once seen as two distinct phases has increasingly come
to be referred to in the English-speaking world as «the long Reformation.» 4
Historians have debated how best to characterize the developments of the
two centuries that followed Luther’s posting of the ninety-ﬁve theses. The

1

2

3

4

Johannes Strickler  (ed.),  Actensammlung  zur  Schweizerischen  Reformationsgeschichte  in
den Jahren 1521–1532, im Anschluß an die gleichzeitigen eidgenössischen Abschiede Zurich
1878–1884; repr. 1989; Rudolf Steck and Gustav Tobler, ed., Aktensammlung zur Geschichte
der Berner Reformation 1521–1532, Bern 1923.
Emil Egli  (ed.),  Aktensammlung  zur  Geschichte  der  Zürcher  Reformation  in  den  Jahren
1519–1533, Nieuwkoop 1973.
Emil Dürr and Paul Roth (eds.), Aktensammlung zur Geschichte der Basler Reformation in
den Jahren 1519 bis Anfang 1534, Basel 1921–1950 [hereafter ABR].
Lorna Jane Abray ﬁrst used the term in the title of her dissertation, eventually published as
The  People’s  Reformation:  Magistrates,  Clergy,  and  Commons  in  Strasbourg,  1500–1598,
Ithaca 1985; cf. the titles of two recent texts intended especially for students, Peter G. Wal-
lace, The Long European Reformation, New York 2004, and Jeffrey R. Watt (ed.), The Long
Reformation, Boston 2006, as well as Nicholas Tyacke (ed.), England’s Long Reformation,
1500–1800, London 1998.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

145

Amy Nelson Burnett

paradigm  of  confessionalization  was  formulated  in  the  1980s  as  a  way  to
understand  the  more  encompassing  transformation  of  politics,  religion,
society, and culture that took place during this period. That paradigm has in
turn been undermined by the gradual accumulation of studies that look at the
impact of the Reformation at the local or territorial level over the course of
several  generations. 5  More  recently,  Thomas  Kaufmann  has  proposed  the
term «confessional culture» to refer to the speciﬁc cultural conﬁgurations
shaped by each of the confessional churches of the early modern period. 6
This term is most useful, however, when applied to a group that is already
relatively homogenous. Kaufmann acknowledges the diversity within Ger-
man Lutheran confessional culture, but this diversity pales in comparison to
that which existed within the Reformed tradition: one need only consider the
signiﬁcant differences between French Huguenots, Scottish Presbyterians,
and the Swiss Reformed. While they shared certain characteristics derived
from  their  common  adherence  to  Reformed  Protestantism,  the  culture  of
each group was equally inﬂuenced by factors outside the sphere of religion. 7
And just as the territorial structure of the Empire contributed to pluralism
within German Lutheran confessional culture, so Swiss Reformed culture
developed somewhat differently in each of the Protestant members of the
Swiss Confederation.

In  order  to  focus  more  speciﬁcally  on  aspects  of  culture  most  directly
inﬂuenced by confession, and to acknowledge the pluralism attributable to
geographical and political circumstances, I prefer to use the term «religious
culture» when examining the long-term outworking of the Reformation at
the local or territorial level. I deﬁne the term as the customs, practices, and
other outward behaviors, both collective and individual, that are prescribed
or endorsed by the institutional church, generally in conjunction with the
secular government, as well as those beliefs, values, norms, expectations, and
patterns of interpretation that underlie, are associated with, and result from
those behaviors. This combination of outward actions and inward attitudes
had larger implications for broader areas such as politics, social structure,
education, and the arts, but I would exclude these areas from the deﬁnition
because they draw attention away from the aspects of culture most immedi-

5

6

7

The literature on confessionalization is enormous. A brief overview as well as references to
the relevant works can be found in Ute Lotz-Heumann, The Concept of «Confessionali-
zation»:  a  Historiographical  Paradigm  in  Dispute,  in:  Memoria  y  Civilización  4  (2001),
93–114; and Stefan Ehrenpreis and Ute Lotz-Heumann, Reformation und konfessionelles
Zeitalter, Darmstadt 2002.
Thomas Kaufmann,  Konfession  und  Kultur.  Lutherischer  Protestantismus  in  der  zweiten
Hälfte des Reformationsjahrhunderts, Tübingen 2006, 3–26.
The diversity within the Reformed tradition is well documented by Philip Benedict, Christ’s
Churches Purely Reformed: A Social History of Calvinism, New Haven 2002.

146

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

ately and directly affected by the Reformation. Likewise, there were aspects
of religious belief and praxis that were only loosely related to or may have
been rejected by the institutional church, but the increasing ability of both
church and state to oversee religious life at the local level led to the marginal-
ization of these aspects over the course of time.

The institutionalization of the evangelical movement and the formation of
a speciﬁc religious culture was a gradual process that took place at different
rates in different places, depending on a variety of factors, not only religious
but  also  political  and  personal.  Among  the  most  valuable  sources  for  the
study of this process are the church ordinances and other ofﬁcial decrees that
deﬁned orthodoxy, established religious ceremonies and practices, and regu-
lated oversight of both clergy and laity within the newly reformed churches. 8
If, as the Reformed were wont to claim, church discipline functioned as «the
nerves  of  the  church,»  then  church  ordinances  comprised  the  skeleton
around which all other aspects of church life grew. 9 Or to switch metaphors,
they functioned like a colony of coral around which the ﬂora and fauna of a
coral reef gather and ﬂourish. In the same way, legislation prescribing belief
and behavior established the framework within which local religious cultures
developed.

Scholars studying the territories of the Holy Roman Empire have been
fortunate in that the church ordinances of the sixteenth century are available
in the critical edition initiated by Emil Sehling at the beginning of the twen-
tieth century. 10 In contrast, students of the Swiss Reformation must work
almost  entirely  with  unpublished  archival  material  and  rare  early  modern
imprints. The critical edition of the church ordinances of Basel and Zurich
now being prepared will contribute signiﬁcantly to a deeper understanding
of the religious culture of each city-republic and will enable comparison not
only between the two but with developments in the territories of the Empire
as well. In order to highlight the importance of this project, this essay will
demonstrate what a study of church ordinances tells us about the long Ref-
ormation and the shaping of religious culture in the city-republic of Basel.
Before describing the variety of church ordinances issued in Basel, how-
ever,  it  is  necessary  to  deﬁne  terms.  I  use  the  term  «church  ordinance»
broadly to include any edict, resolution, or other ofﬁcial decree issued by the
magistrate in its role as guardian of the church. 11 Some of these were issued in

8

9

For an overview, John Witte, Jr., Law and Protestantism: The Legal Teachings of the Lutheran
Reformation, Cambridge 2002, 177–96.
Raymond A. Mentzer, Jr., «Disciplina nervus ecclesiae»: The Calvinist Reform of Morals at
Nîmes, in: Sixteenth Century Journal 18 (1987), 89–115.

10 Ernst Sehling (ed.), Die evangelischen Kirchenordnungen des XVI. Jahrhunderts Göttingen/

Leipzig/Tübingen 1902.

11 My deﬁnition here and in more detail below is strongly inﬂuenced by the types of documents

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

147

Amy Nelson Burnett

printed form by Basel’s Council, others exist only in manuscript copies or as
resolutions noted in the records of Council meetings. Although the decisions
and decrees were adopted by the Council, most of them – and particularly
the  lengthiest  and  most  far-reaching  –  were  written  by  committees  com-
prised of both churchmen and Council members. With only few exceptions,
they were issued in response to concerns brought before the Council by the
clergy.  They  are  thus  very  concrete  examples  of  the  interrelationship
between ecclesiastical and secular authority in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries.

Basel’s church ordinances can be grouped into several different categories.
The ﬁrst and most obvious group is that which best ﬁts the traditional deﬁ-
nition of a church ordinance: legislation that deﬁnes correct doctrine, intro-
duces new ecclesiastical ceremonies or modiﬁes existing ones to correspond
to those doctrinal standards, and institutes measures to oversee selection and
performance of the clergy and to regulate the moral conduct of the laity.

Basel’s ﬁrst church ordinance, issued at the beginning of April 1529, was
intended as the constitution of the city’s church. Like many of its counter-
parts elsewhere, Basel’s Reformation Ordinance combined a restructuring of
the city’s church with assumption of control over marriage and provisions
against immoral conduct ranging from the denigration of the sacraments to
ostentatious dress. Prominent among its provisions was the examination of
the  clergy  to  ensure  that  they  were  qualiﬁed  to  perform  their  pastoral
responsibilities. The ordinance reorganized the city’s parish structure, sub-
ordinating the formerly independent parishes of St. Alban, St. Martin, and
St. Ulrich to the cathedral parish, which was thus extended to cover the east-
ern half of the city. It also speciﬁed the times and places of public worship,
although it said nothing speciﬁcally about the forms such worship would
take. Similarly, it outlined the duties of the city’s parish pastors and their
assistants and obligated them to teach in accordance with God’s word, but its
doctrinal  statements  remained  fairly  general.  Its  most  speciﬁc  statements
concerned baptism and the Lord’s Supper and were intended to counter the
opposing views of Catholics, Anabaptists and Lutherans. 12

It did not take long for the church’s leaders to become aware that the Ref-
ormation ordinance was incomplete, and so over the next few decades the
Council issued a series of decrees and ordinances intended to supplement it.
The most notable omission from the Reformation Ordinance was any pro-
cedure regulating the exercise of church discipline. Already in the spring of
1530  Johann  Oecolampadius  urged  the  Council  to  restore  the  practice  of

included in Sehling’s edition (n. 10); see Sehling’s discussion in the foreword to Vol. 1, pp.
VIII–IX.

12 ABR 3:383–409.

148

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

excommunication to its proper, scriptural form, and at the end of the year the
Council issued a pair of ban ordinances, one for the city and the other for the
rural churches, that prescribed the appointment of lay Bannherren for each
parish and outlined the procedure for church discipline. 13 The question of
who had the right to impose the ban proved to be controversial, however.
Over the next several years the Council continued to issue «improvements»
to the original ordinance that conﬁrmed the authority of the Bannherren and
deﬁned  more  clearly  the  roles  of  pastors, Bannherren,  and  magistrate  in
imposing a sentence of excommunication. 14 The last of these modiﬁcations
came in 1553 and was occasioned by a query from the Genevan church and
Council asking about the exercise of the ban in the city. It clariﬁed once and
for all that the Council, and not the pastors or Bannherren, bore the ﬁnal
responsibility  for  imposing  a  sentence  of  either  excommunication  or  civil
punishment. 15

In addition to the ban ordinance and its various modiﬁcations, there is
another group of publications that can be seen as appendices to the Reforma-
tion Ordinance of 1529, ﬁlling in the silences concerning doctrine and cer-
emonies left by the Reformation Ordinance. This group consists of the vari-
ous  editions  of  the  Basel  liturgical  agenda  and  the  Basel  Confession
published over the course of the sixteenth century. The ﬁrst edition of the
agenda actually predated the Reformation Ordinance. Published in 1526, it
established the basic structure for the ceremonies of baptism and the Lord’s
Supper  and  presented  a  liturgy  for  the  visitation  of  the  sick.  These  cer-
emonies were modiﬁed slightly and an order for marriage was added to the
1537 edition of the agenda, which became the standard service book in Basel
for the rest of the century. Also included in the 1537 agenda was a short cat-
echism attributed to Oecolampadius. Later editions of the agenda included
not  only  this  catechism  but  also  a  lengthier  adaptation  of  it  by  Oswald
Myconius.  These  catechisms  thus  acquired  quasi-ofﬁcial  status  within  the
Basel church. Last but not least, the Basel Confession, adopted in 1534 and
reprinted several times over the sixteenth century, provided a broader pres-

14

13 ABR 5: 60–64; For the background, Walther Köhler, Zürcher Ehegericht und Genfer Consis-
torium,  Leipzig  1932–42,  1:  274–294;  Ernst Staehelin,  Das  theologische  Lebenswerk
Johannes Oekolampads, Leipzig 1939, 506–22; Olaf Kuhr, «Die Macht des Bannes und der
Buße». Kirchenzucht und Erneuerung der Kirche bei Johannes Oekolampad (1482–1531),
Bern 1999, 171–95, 207–31.
10 June 1531, ABR 5: 236–7; ABR 6: 119–20; Aug. 1538, Öffentliche Bibliothek der Univer-
sität Basel [hereafter BUB] MsKiAr 22a, fo. 258r–60r; provisions concerning the ban in the
synodal ordinance of Nov. 1539, BUB MsKiAr 22a, 272r; 19 Nov. 1539, Staatsarchiv des Kan-
tons Basel-Stadt [hereafter BStA] Kirchen Akten A9, 375v–376v; Staehelin, Lebenswerk (n.
13) 523–25; Köhler, Zürcher Ehegericht (n. 13) 293–303.

15 BStA A 6 (Schwarzes Buch), 162v–63r; copy in BUB MsKiAr 23a, 96. Details in Uwe Plath,

Calvin und Basel in den Jahren 1552–1556, Zurich 1974, 94–111.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

149

Amy Nelson Burnett

entation of the city’s ofﬁcial faith than that contained in the Reformation
Ordinance. 16Although  neither  agenda  nor  Confession  can  be  described  as
church ordinances, their goal of deﬁning orthodoxy and shaping ecclesiasti-
cal practices meshed with the overall goals of the Reformation Ordinance
and corresponded to elements of church ordinances issued by other cities
and territories.

A  third  category  consists  of  legislation  concerned  speciﬁcally  with  the
churches in Basel’s rural territories. The ﬁrst of these was the Acta Liechsta-
lensia,  the  morals  ordinance  issued  in  August  1540.  As  its  subtitle  pro-
claimed, the Acta was a codiﬁcation «of all previously issued Christian man-
dates»  which  would  enable  their  uniform  enforcement  by Obervögte,
Schultheisse, and pastors. 17 Its provisions concerned worship attendance, cat-
echization,  and  the  selection  and  duties  of  the Bannherren,  as  well  as  the
more secular concerns of lavish wedding celebrations, parish festivals (Kil-
binen), gambling, and the supervision of taverns.

More important for the regulation of the church was the Kirchendiener-
ordnung issued in 1561. 18 This ordinance revived the supervisory structure
and corporate identity of the rural pastors that had existed in the pre-Refor-
mation chapter of Sissgau, the district of the medieval diocese of Basel that
corresponded most closely with Basel’s rural territory. The rural clergy as a
whole were divided into three district chapters corresponding to the admin-
istrative divisions of the territory. Each of these district chapters had its own
dean, who was in turn subject to the authority of the primary dean of the
entire Sissgau chapter. Each district chapter was to meet twice a year, and
every two years the primary dean was to call a general meeting of the whole
Sissgau chapter to address problems involving doctrine or practice and to
report their concerns to the secular and ecclesiastical authorities in the city. 19
In 1578 a new ordinance was drafted for the rural chapter that reafﬁrmed the
authority of the primary dean and the three district chapter deans. It also laid
out new procedures to be followed in disciplining the clergy and dealing with
conﬂict among pastors or between pastors and the laity. This draft was ﬁn-
ally conﬁrmed by the Council at the end of 1582. 20

16 On the liturgical agenda and the catechisms, Amy Nelson Burnett, Teaching the Reforma-

tion: Ministers and Their Message in Basel, 1529–1629, New York 2006, 48–55.

19

17 BUB MsKiAr 22a, 290r–292v.
18 Background for this and the following paragraphs in Amy Nelson Burnett, Controlling the
Clergy: The Oversight of Basel’s Rural Pastors in the Sixteenth Century, in: Zwa 25 (1998),
129–142.
«Die alten oder ersten Statuten nach der Reformation Gemeiner Brüedern vnd Kilchendie-
nern des Capitls in Sißgöw,» BUB MsKiAr 22a, 345r–348r. The ordinance speciﬁed that these
reports  should  go  to  the  city  pastors  and  the Deputaten,  the  three Ratsherren  plus  the
Stadtschreiber who were collectively responsible for overseeing church and school affairs.
«Ordnung und statuten Gemeiner Brüederen vnd Kilchendiener des Capitels im Sissgoüw,»

20

150

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

A fourth group of documents is related to the statutes for the rural church
in that they also were concerned primarily with the oversight of the clergy.
These are the ordinances prescribing the calling of and procedures for synods
issued  in  1539  and  1571  and  for  visitations  issued  in  1541,  as  well  as  the
instructions for visitors from 1554 and 1582. The Reformation Ordinance
had called for synods to be held semiannually, as was the case in Zurich, but
after Oecolampadius’ death in 1531 they were held only once a year. A major
conﬂict concerning the relationship of university, church, and magistrate that
broke  out  in  1538–39  led  to  the  issuance  of  a  new  synodal  ordinance  in
November 1539 which sharpened the provisions regulating the censure of
the clergy that was a regular part of the synods. 21

A little more than a year later the Council decided that there should be a
yearly visitation for the rural churches and so issued a brief ordinance out-
lining the procedure to be followed by the visitors. 22 The visitation ordinance
did not mention any connection to the synod, but over the next two decades
the synods and visitations were apparently seen as accomplishing roughly
the same goals, since only one of them was held in any given year. 23 In 1554
the Council issued instructions to its visitors that summarized the message
that the Council’s representative was to deliver in each parish. 24

The  string  of  fairly  regular  synods  and  visitations  ended  in  1559.
Although the lack of sources make it hard to document, they may have been
replaced by the district and general chapter meetings of the rural clergy pre-
scribed in the 1562 Kirchendienerordnung. 25 Not until 1571 was another gen-
eral synod held that included both rural and urban clergy. In view of both the
long hiatus since the last general synod and the doctrinal conﬂicts within the
church that were the immediate cause of the synod’s convocation, the Coun-

draft from 1578, BStA Kirchen Archiv HH 3; as adopted in 1582, BStA Kirchen Akten F6,
no. 9.

21 BUB  MsKiAr  22a,  267r–271v;  the  ordinance  also  speciﬁed  that  there  would  be  only  one
synod each year. See Burnett, Teaching the Reformation (n. 16) 68–77; Amy Nelson Burnett,
«Kilchen ist uff dem Radthus»? Conﬂicting Views of Magistrate and Ministry in Early Ref-
ormation  Basel,  in:  Luise Schorn-Schütte  and  Sven Tode  (eds.),  Debatten  über  die  Legi-
timation von Herrschaft: Politische Sprachen in der Frühen Neuzeit, Berlin 2006, 49–65.

22 BUB MsKiAr 23a, 278r.
23

Synods were held in 1542, 1545, 1550, 1555, 1557, 1558, and 1559; visitations in 1546, 1549,
1551, and 1554. There are no records of either a synod or a visitation held in 1543, 1544,1547,
1553, and 1556; there is a description of an undated synod that may have been held in either
1548 or 1552, based on the list of participants, BUB MsKiAr 23a, 289r.

24 Visitation instructions for 1554, BStA Kirchen Akten A9, 387r–389r.
25 No records of these meetings survive, but Christian Wurstisen mentions a meeting of a rural
synod  in  May,  1562,  R. Luginbühl  (ed.),  Diarium  des  Christian  Wurtisen,  1557–1581,  in:
Basler Zeitschrift 1 (1902), 53–145, at 74; the Liestal pastor Johann Rudolf Wildysen referred
to a general convent of the rural pastors in May 1564, Staatsarchiv des Kantons Basel-Land,
Kirchenbücher, Liestal 1, 214.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

151

Amy Nelson Burnett

cil issued a new synodal ordinance that outlined the procedure to be fol-
lowed, which did not differ greatly from that of 1539. 26 A decade later, the
visitation instructions from 1554 were re-issued for the newly-called visi-
tation.  At  that  time  the  Liestal Stadtschreiber  also  drafted  more  lengthy
instructions for the visitors outlining the schedule for the visitation and the
procedure to follow in each of the ﬁve villages that they would visit. His
instructions were probably intended to inform a new generation of visitors
of the procedure that had been followed in earlier visitations. 27 When synods
and visitations began to be held more frequently after Johann Jakob Gry-
naeus became head of Basel’s church in 1586, the records demonstrate that
they followed the same procedures that had been established in the 1540s and
1550s.

The  ﬁfth  category  of  church  ordinances  consists  of  edicts  and  decrees
concerning  the  structure  and  administration  of  the  church.  Few  of  these
decrees were ofﬁcially published, and the decisions can be found only in the
records of Council sessions or, by the end of the century, in the minutes of
the weekly meetings of the Kirchenrat, the four parish pastors from the city
and  theology  professors  who  met  to  discuss  matters  of  concern  to  the
church. 28 These edicts were almost always issued in response to speciﬁc situ-
ations or problems within the church, but they occasionally assumed greater
importance because they were reissued and so were viewed as transcending
the time and place in which they were ﬁrst adopted. One example of this is
the resolution read to the pastors in the fall of 1560 rebuking them for the
discord among them, their polemic from the pulpit, and their public criticism
of  individual  Council  members.  The  Council  presented  this  resolution  as
both a reminder and a reinforcement of the provision in the Reformation
Ordinance that pastors were to proclaim only the pure word of God from
the pulpit and to rebuke sins in general rather than denouncing individual
cases of sin. Twelve years later, in the wake of yet another controversy that
had divided the city’s pastoral corps, the Council again read the 1560 resol-
ution to the pastors. 29 As in Zurich, the line between the free preaching of

26 The copy of the synod ordinance in BUB MsKir 23a, 96–8 bears the remark, «hat 17 Artikel,
ist aber wenig verschieden von der Ordnung 1539.» On the conﬂict that led to the calling of
the synod, Amy Nelson Burnett, Generational Conﬂict in the Late Reformation: The Basel
Paroxysm, in: Journal of Interdisciplinary History 32 (2001), 219–244.

27 The 1582 re-issue, BStA Kirchen Akten A9, 518r–522v; the unofﬁcial guidelines for the visi-

tors from 1582, BUB MsKiAr 22a, 558r–562v.

28 An early and undated exception is the Diaconordnung, BUB MsKiAr 22a, 341r–v; Protokolle
of the Kirchenrat from 1586, BStA Kirchen Archiv D 1,1. One or more of the Deputaten
would sometimes attend these meetings.
1560 Ratserkanntnis in BStA Kirchen Akten C3, 98r–102r; 1572 re-issue in BUB MsKiAr
23a, 363r–366v.

29

152

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

God’s word and the use (or misuse) of the pulpit for personal and political
reasons proved hard to deﬁne. 30

Also included within this category are edicts and decisions that laid down
procedures  or  principles  that  became  an  integral  part  of  how  the  church
functioned on a day-to-day basis. Most of these changes were prompted by
the pastors but had to be approved by the magistrate. Thus, for example, the
pastors had to ask the magistrate to allow change to the preaching schedules
or the duties of pastors and their assistants. Over time the pattern of worship
services in the city was modiﬁed by the transformation of the Tuesday morn-
ing sermon into a special prayer service, the reservation of Sunday afternoon
services to catechetical preaching, and the spread of Saturday vespers services
to all four of the parish churches. Some of these changes the pastors seem to
have introduced by themselves, without the backing of the Council. Thus
after a decade of effort Grynaeus was able to increase the frequency of cat-
echization from the four times a year prescribed in the Reformation Ordi-
nance to once or even twice a month. For other matters, though, the pastors
needed the public support of the magistrate. The Reformation Ordinance
speciﬁed that children were to be examined by the pastor before receiving
their  ﬁrst  communion,  but  this  prescription  was  apparently  only  rarely
enforced through the sixteenth century. Only at the beginning of the seven-
teenth century is there evidence that pastors were regularly performing this
examination, and it took an edict from the Council in 1622 to reinforce the
pastor’s authority to do so. 31

The decisions of the Council endorsed changes not only in the practice of
the ministry but also in its structure. In 1539, for instance, in the wake of the
university controversy, the Council decreed that the leadership of the city’s
church should be shared by the city’s four parish pastors, who would preside
in rotation over the regular meetings of the city’s clergy. Almost ﬁfty years
later the Council ended this practice and placed sole authority in the hands of
the cathedral pastor, Johann Jakob Grynaeus, as a way to strengthen his con-
trol over the church. 32 Again, neither decision was formally published as part
of a church ordinance, but the Council’s decision concerning the leadership
of the city’s church obviously had signiﬁcant consequences for ecclesiastical
administration.

The ﬁnal category is comprised not of a different type of church ordi-

30 On the case of Zurich, Hans Ulrich Bächtold, Heinrich Bullinger vor dem Rat. Zur Gestal-
tung  und  Verwaltung  des  Zürcher  Staatswesens  in  den Jahren  1531  bis  1575,  Bern  1982,
15–18, 37–45.

31 The Tuesday prayer services were a feature already by 1541, the vespers services in St. Peter

and St. Leonhard in 1613; Burnett, Teaching the Reformation (n. 16) 55–7; 226–33.

32 Burnett, Teaching the Reformation (n. 16) 74–5, 215; the edict of 1539 in BStA Ratsbücher

B4, Erkanntnisbücher 1 (1525–44), 158v–159r; of 1587 in BUB MsKiAr 23b, fol. 45–7.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

153

Amy Nelson Burnett

nance but is rather the group of earlier edicts, ordinances and other docu-
ments that were re-issued over the course of the 1590s and served to codify
the doctrinal and legal basis of Basel’s church at the end of the sixteenth cen-
tury. The ﬁrst of these was Das geistliche und herzliche Kleinod der Kirchen
Gottes in Stadt und Landschaft Basel, compiled by Antistes Grynaeus and
published  in  1590.  It  contained  in  one  volume  the  Basel  confession,  cat-
echism, and liturgical agenda, as well as a short interrogation for children
before they received their ﬁrst communion. In 1595 the Acta Liechstalensia
was re-printed, and two years later the Council re-conﬁrmed the Kirchen-
dienerordnung of 1582. 33 This conﬁrmation was necessary to indicate that
the Sissgau statutes had not been revoked or replaced by a new Kirchendiene-
rordnung that was also issued in December 1597. 34 The new ordinance listed
ten  articles  on  which  every  new  pastor  was  to  be  examined  before  being
placed in his ﬁrst parish. The articles asked about the individual’s vocation to
the ministry, his acceptance of correct doctrine as contained in the Bible and
the Basel Confession, his readiness to carry out all of the responsibilities of
the  ministry  and  to  live  an  exemplary  life,  and  his  intention  to  obey  his
ecclesiastical  superiors.  More  controversially,  in  May  1598  the  Council
decreed that all of Basel’s pastors then in ofﬁce should also subscribe to the
new Kirchendienerordnung as indication of their acceptance of its ten articles
and of the Basel Confession more generally. Despite resistance from a few of
the rural pastors and their supporters, the Council prevailed and the signa-
tures were duly obtained. 35

Obviously,  legislation  concerning  the  church  continued  through  the
seventeenth  century,  but  the  publications,  decrees  and  ordinances  of  the
1590s  served  at  the  time  as  a  summing  up  and  a  public  statement  of  the
beliefs, practices, and expectations regarding conduct for both the clergy and
the laity as members of Basel’s church. As such, they make a convenient stop-
ping place, allowing us to turn our attention to the broader question of what
these ordinances tell us about the longer-term impact of the Reformation in
Basel.

To  begin  with,  this  overview  of  Basel’s  church  ordinances  reveals  two
contrasting developments. On the one hand there was an evident desire for
continuity with the structures instituted in the early days of the Reforma-
tion; on the other there was the signiﬁcant degree of change that took place

See the note at the end of the copy in BStA Kirchen Archiv HH3.

33
34 BStA Kirchen Akten B1.
35 Two printed copies of the 1597 Kirchendienerordnung in BStA Kirchen Akten B1, the ﬁrst
with the subscriptions of the city pastors, along with a description of the signing, and the sec-
ond with the signatures of the pastors from the Liestal district chapter; description of the
debate over the required subscription in the BStA Kirchen Archiv D 1,1 (Kirchenratsproto-
kolle I), 484–87.

154

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

over the course of the sixteenth century. The ﬁrst development is manifested
by the re-issuing of edicts and ordinances, under the apparent assumption
that the structures and practices put in place by an earlier generation were
sufﬁcient for dealing with the problems of the present. In some cases this
assumption may have been justiﬁed. Visitation reports from the early seven-
teenth century contain some of the same complaints about gambling, danc-
ing, cursing and swearing, behavior at parish festivals, and the like that had
been voiced in the ﬁrst visitations held immediately after the ofﬁcial adop-
tion of the Reformation. The authorities believed that successive generations
of Baslers had to be made aware of the edicts’ contents, and successive gen-
erations of ofﬁcials had to be encouraged to enforce those edicts. The visi-
tation reports give the impression, however, that the people did not heed, and
the ofﬁcials did not impose, the sanctions speciﬁed in the edicts.

In other ways the desire for continuity could be more problematic, for
Basel’s  ecclesiastical  traditions  were  themselves  open  to  interpretation.
Already in 1539 the Council cited the alleged departure from the procedures
for the examination of the clergy prescribed by «that faithful, God-fearing
man, Dr. Oecolampadius of blessed memory,» as an excuse to introduce a
more rigorous censure of the clergy in its 1539 synodal ordinance. 36 Oswald
Myconius complained to his friends that Oecolampadius would never have
agreed to the type of examination that the Council now required, but his
protests had no effect. 37

More  importantly,  the  world  did  not  stand  still  outside  of  Basel,  and
sooner or later the desire to adhere to traditions dating back to the early years
of the Reformation would clash with the need to adapt to the changing real-
ities of an increasingly confessionalized climate. The catechism attributed to
Oecolampadius provides a good illustration of this. By the end of the century
it had assumed an almost iconic status, which posed problems because it did
not accord fully with the emerging theology of Reformed Orthodoxy – spe-
ciﬁcally, the Reformed numbering of the Ten Commandments and the inter-
pretation of Christ’s descent into hell. The leaders of the church met with
resistance from some of the older parish pastors when they modiﬁed the sec-
tion on the Decalogue to match what had become the Reformed norm, so
that the prohibition against graven images would be a separate command-
ment and the former ninth and tenth commandments would be joined in one
long tenth commandment against coveting. Power relations being what they

36 BUB MsKiAr 22a, 267r.
37 Myconius to Wolfgang Capito, 23 Dec. 1539, summarized in Olivier Millet, Correspondance
de  Wolfgang  Capiton  (1478–1541).  Analyse  et  index  (D’après  le  Thesaurus  Baumianus  et
autres sources), Strasbourg 1982, 256–7 no. 722; cf. the synodical articles from 1542 and the
Council’s response, BStA Kirchen Akten C3, 43v–44r, 47r–v; Burnett, Teaching the Refor-
mation (n. 16) 73–7.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

155

Amy Nelson Burnett

are, however, these older pastors were forced to accept the changes, and by
the  early  seventeenth  century  their  colleagues  were  reporting  that  the
children in their parishes were learning the «long tenth commandment.» 38
Identiﬁcation with the traditions of the early Reformation continued to
play a role in shaping Basel’s religious culture, but in the long run, the second
development, the changes in both ecclesiastical structures and religious prac-
tices, proved to be more signiﬁcant. The evolution of institutional structures
is best illustrated by the increasing centralization of ecclesiastical adminis-
tration and the gradual development of a hierarchical system of clerical over-
sight. Over the course of the sixteenth century the meetings of the clergy
shifted  from  a  relatively  democratic  gathering  of  equals  to  a  more  formal
structure that subjected the rural clergy to the deans of their district, then to
the general chapter, and ﬁnally to the Kirchenrat in the city. 39

Reformed doctrine and practices could also give rise to questions that the
medieval church had not had to address and that therefore required new sol-
utions. Most poignant in this regard was the problem of providing for the
widows  and  children  of  deceased  pastors.  This  issue  ﬁrst  appears  in  the
synod  and  visitation  records  from  the  1550s,  as  the  ﬁrst  generation  of
Reformed pastors either died or were so weakened by age that they could no
longer carry out their duties. With no spare cash to provide pensions to sup-
port the pastors’ families, the church authorities had no choice but to try to
share out the work among all the other ministers. The 1562 Kirchendiener-
ordnung  required  neighboring  clergy  to  provide  pastoral  care  for  parish-
ioners for six months after a pastor died, so that his widow and family would
have a grace period in which to stabilize their ﬁnancial situation (usually by
the widow’s remarriage). The Kirchendienerordnung of 1582 extended this
period of vacancy to a year and introduced provisions concerning the legal
guardianship of the deceased pastor’s under-age children and specifying the
division of the inheritance between the widow and children.

The pastors’ families were not simply an issue after the pastor’s death,
however. Because the clergy were to be models of Christian comportment to
their parishioners, both Kirchendienerordnungen contained provisions con-
cerning their family life. Pastors were to live honorably and at peace with
their wives, children and servants. Both pastors and their wives were to dress
appropriately and to behave with restraint at public celebrations, such as the
weddings  that  they  were  expected  to  attend  (the  pastor  was  speciﬁcally
enjoined to pray before the meal!), and cases of marital discord were to be
dealt with by the district chapters. With regard to family life while the pastor
was alive and ﬁnancial support after his death, the more speciﬁc provisions of

38 Burnett, Teaching the Reformation (n. 16) 95, 216–7.
39 Burnett, Controlling the Clergy (n. 18).

156

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

the 1582 ordinance demonstrate that church leaders were being forced to for-
mulate procedures that responded to real-life problems in the present and
that would prevent such problems in the future. 40

Perhaps most striking in this brief summary of continuities and changes is
the fact that by the early seventeenth century, many of the provisions of the
Reformation  Ordinance  had  been  modiﬁed  or  replaced  –  or  were  simply
ignored.  The  reason  for  this  is  not  hard  to  ﬁnd.  Even  more  so  than  later
ordinances, the Reformation Ordinance was the product of a very speciﬁc
point in time. This is particularly true of its doctrinal contents. The ordi-
nance’s lengthy denunciation of the sacriﬁce of the mass and its warnings
against those who despised the sacraments of baptism and the Lord’s Supper
reﬂect the bitter conﬂicts with Catholic clergy in the city and the inﬂuence of
Anabaptist «hedge preachers» in the countryside. Although individual but
high-placed Catholics and small pockets of rural Anabaptists continued to be
a problem throughout the sixteenth century, neither group posed a signiﬁ-
cant  challenge  to  Basel’s  established  church  by  mid-century.  Later  ordi-
nances and edicts were seen as reﬁnements and modiﬁcations that adapted
the church to the needs of the day, and there was no need to go back to renew
the older and more general provisions of the Reformation Ordinance. For
Basel’s church, the Reformation Ordinance may have signaled the end of the
ﬁrst phase of the Reformation, but it was much more important for marking
the  beginning  of  the  long-term  transformation  of  religious  culture  in  the
city-republic.

How that transformation was effected is told in the church ordinances of
the sixteenth century – their provisions concerning preaching and pastoral
care, their evolving regulation of worship and religious instruction, and their
gradual development of a means to oversee both clergy and laity. And the
impact of these ordinances can be seen in the reports from the visitations and
synods conducted over the course of the century: little change at ﬁrst, but
gradual  penetration  of  new  beliefs  and  practices  after  mid-century  that
resulted by the early seventeenth century in a religious culture quite different
from that described in the earliest visitation records. 41

It is necessary at this point to restate my concern speciﬁcally with reli-
gious culture rather than with culture more broadly deﬁned. Basel’s citizens
and subjects did not by any means become the model Christians that their
pastors may have wanted. The clergy continued to complain about the same

40

1562 ordinance, BUB MsKiAr 22a, 346v–47r; 1582 ordinance BStA Kirchen Archiv HH 3,
7v–9v.

41 Burnett, Teaching the Reformation (n. 16) 221–59; Amy Nelson Burnett, Basel’s Rural Pas-
tors as Mediators of Confessional and Social Discipline, in: Central European History 33
(2000), 67–85.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

157

Amy Nelson Burnett

forms  of  moral  misconduct  that,  for  instance,  the  Liestal  Acts  legislated
against, but they did not view that misconduct as an aspect of religious cul-
ture, since they saw it as the duty of the state, not the church, to act against it.
Similarly, at the end of the century the pastors began to report cases of beha-
vior concerning practices they had earlier ignored, such as visiting a sooth-
sayer or making a pilgrimage to a shrine in a neighboring Catholic area to
seek healing. This was clearly the type of marginalized behavior that reli-
gious authorities were trying to suppress, but it comprised only a small part
of the religious culture that had developed in Basel. More important is the
fact that seventeenth-century Baslers practiced their religion differently than
their ancestors had. They attended church to hear sermons, not to see the
miraculous consecration of the Host or to receive divine protection for the
day; the children could repeat the Reformed understanding of the sacraments
and recite their prayers in German; and, at least according to their pastors,
most Baslers died knowing that their salvation rested on their faith and not
on their reception of the viaticum. Many elements of late medieval beliefs
about the supernatural continued, but they existed within a Reformed frame-
work of interpretation. 42

Basel’s case is not unique. Richard Weiss’s description of the outlines of
Protestant  popular  culture  in  Switzerland  looks  at  a  later  period,  but  the
foundation for this culture was laid during the course of the sixteenth cen-
tury. 43 In each of the Reformed city-republics, the process of replacing one
religious  culture  with  another  extended  over  several  generations  and  was
accomplished within the institutional and religious framework established
by those cities’ church ordinances. Basel was in fact fairly typical in issuing a
variety  of  edicts  and  ordinances  over  the  course  of  the  sixteenth  century,
aimed at ﬁne-tuning the church’s administrative and supervisory structure,
regulating worship and religious instruction, and prohibiting certain forms
of behavior.

One might therefore argue that the older source collections do not even
begin to tell the story of the Reformation in Switzerland. If we want to know
what really happened after the break with the medieval church, we need to
look at the institutions and practices put in place by the church ordinances
issued in the century or more after the Reformation. Only then can we exam-
ine the impact of those structures on local religious culture and draw informed
conclusions about the contours of the Long Reformation in Switzerland.

42 Cf.  R. W. Scribner’s  discussion  of  how  Protestants  changed  but  did  not  eliminate  beliefs
about magic, Magic and the Formation of Protestant Popular Culture in Germany, in: Lyndal
Roper (ed.), Religion and Culture in Germany (1400–1800), Leiden 2001, 323–45.

43 Richard Weiss, Grundzüge einer protestantischen Volkskultur, in: Schweizerisches Archiv für

Volkskunde 61 (1965), 75–91.

158

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Basel’s Long Reformation: Church Ordinances and the Shaping of Religious Culture .. .

Abstract

In their role as guardians of the city-republic’s church, Basel’s Council issued
a series of edicts and decrees that deﬁned orthodoxy, set standards of con-
duct,  and  established  supervisory  mechanisms  for  both  clergy  and  laity.
These church ordinances shaped the structures of the church in response to
new problems and changing circumstances over the course of the sixteenth
century and so provided the institutional framework for the development of
a Reformed religious culture.

Prof. Dr. Amy Nelson Burnett, University of Nebraska-Lincoln

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

159

Amy Nelson Burnett

160

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

