Stefania Salvadori

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper:

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper:

re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

By Stefania Salvadori

The debate concerning the true nature of the Holy Supper runs through the
concluding chapters of the second book of De Arte Dubitandi. In this text –
interrupted by the death of its author, in 1563, and preserved as a manuscript
which was discovered in the second half of the twentieth century 1 – Sebas-
tian Castellio summarizes and organizes his doctrine of tolerance, applying
his theoretical principles to the most controversial themes, on which Chris-
tianity was hopelessly divided: the Trinity, the Justiﬁcation and, indeed, the
Holy Supper. Whereas the literature did not hesitate to ﬁnd elements of fun-
damental difference between the proposal developed by Castellio and the
Reformed tradition as regards the ﬁrst two points 2, the judgment was the
opposite with respect to the doctrine of the Holy Supper. Reminiscent of the
bitter struggles of the second sacramental dispute 3, the Savoyard humanist
seemed  to  enter  the  theological  debate  without  proposing  any  substantial
changes in comparison with the arguments already used by Zwingli in order
to legitimize a spiritual interpretation of the Holy Supper against the one of-
fered by Luther 4.

Apparently  the  solution  proposed  in De  Arte  Dubitandi  is,  therefore,

1 De Arte Dubitandi original manuscript runs through Ff. 56 to 167 of Miscellany n. 505 pre-
served in Gemmente Bibliothek, Rotterdam. Modern editions: Sebastian Castellio, De Arte
Dubitandi, edited by Elizabeth Feist, in: Reale Accademia d’Italia, studi e documenti VII,
edited by Delio Cantimori, Roma, 1937; Sebastian Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi et conﬁ-
dendi, ignorandi et sciendi, edited by Elizabeth Feist, Leiden, 1981. Quotations in the follow-
ing pages are from the latter one.

2 As regards Castellio’s Eucharistic doctrine the literature is lacking in detailed description and
must be gleaned from monographic studies. Among the traditional analyses of Castellio the
following may be noted as reference: Ferdinand Buisson, Sébastien Castellion, sa vie et son
œuvre (1515–1563). Étude sur les origines du protestantisme libéral français, 2 Voll., Paris,
1892 (Reprint: Nieuwkoop, 1964); Hans Rudolf Guggisberg, Sebastian Castellio im Urteil
seiner  Nachwelt  von  Späthumanismus  bis  zur  Aufklärung,  Basel-Stuttgart,  1956;  Hans
Rudolf Guggisberg, Sebastian Castellio 1515–1563. Humanist und Verteidiger der religiösen
Toleranz im konfessionellen Zeitalter, Göttingen, 1997; Carla Gallicet Calvetti, Il testamento
dottrinale di Sebastien Castellion e l’evoluzione razionalistica del suo pensiero, Milano, 2005.
Ernst Bizer, Studien zur Geschichte des Abendmahlsstreits im 16. Jahrhundert, Gütersloh,
1940; Brian Albert Gerrish, Discerning the Body: Sign and Reality in Luther’s Controversy
with the Swiss, in: «Journal of Religion» 68 (1988), 377–395.

3

4 Among many discussions of Zwingli’s sacramental theology and its relation to Luther see the
most  substantial  study  of  Walther Köhler,  Zwingli  und  Luther  in  ihrem  Streit  über  das
Abendmahl nach seinen politischen und religiösen Beziehungen, II Bände, Gütersloh, 1953.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

23

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the

pursuit of tolerance

Stefania Salvadori

often  considered  not  so  original 5,  as  it  intended  to  look  at  the Consensus
Tigurinus 6 as a dangerous restriction of the religious freedom announced at
the  beginning  of  the  Reformation 7.  A  different  interpretation  is  possible,
however, if we consider the section De Coena Domini in its substantial con-
nection with the theme of the Beneﬁcium Christi. In addition to quoting the
formal exegetical method and the spiritual interpretation deﬁned by Zwingli,
Castellio proposes a new theoretical solution, that is widely divergent from
the one offered by the Zurich theologian. In particular, the latter’s famous
identiﬁcation between the Eucharistic manducatio and the faith is denied by
Castellio on the basis of a different Christological model.

Certainly this is a nuanced change, which De Arte Dubitandi does not
develop systematically. It reveals, however, a clear difference of theological
approach which stems from a brief confrontation with the pages of De vera
et  falsa  religione  commentarius  dedicated  to  the  same  topic.  This  double
movement in the formal quotation 8 of and theoretical confrontation with
Zwingli 9 substantiates the peculiarities and, at the same time, the active role –
as opposed to a servile repetition – of Castellio’s understanding of the Holy
Supper  in  the  contemporary  theological  debate.  The  following  pages  are
dedicated to this analysis.

5

6

9

That  argues  E. Feist  in Castellio,  De  Arte  Dubitandi,  172,  footnote  12:  «This  part  of  the
chapter is not very original. Castellio follows Zwingli and Oecolampadius.»
See, for example, Ulrich Gäbler, Das Zustandekommen des Consensus Tigurinus im Jahre
1549, «Theologische Literaturzeitung» 104/5 (1979), 321–332; Paul Rorem, The ‹Consensus
Tigurinus› (1549). Did Calvin compromise? in: Calvinus Sacrae Scripturae Professor. Proced-
ings  of  the  International  Congress  of  Calvin  Research,  Wilhelm  H. Neuser  (Ed.),  Grand
Rapids,  1994,  72–90;  Wim Janse,  Calvin’s  Eucharistic  Theology:  Three  Dogma-Historical
Observations, in: Calvinus sacrarum literarum interpres. Papers of the International Con-
gress on Calvin Research, Herman J. Selderhuis (Ed.), Göttingen 2008, 37–69.

7 Cantimori, Eretici italiani del Cinquecento, 91–92. For a detailed description of Castellio’s
Eucharistic doctrine and its relation to other views, in particular to Ochino’s one, see Marco
Bracali, Aspetti «radicali» del dibattito eucaristico nel ’500: Castellione e Ochino, in: «Rivista
di storia della ﬁlosoﬁa» 4/2000, 565–586.

8 Castellio seldom declares the authors to whom he refers both as target of his confutation and
as source of his work. As regards Zwingli, he never quotes him openly so that we can only
suppose, the Savoyard humanist used him as sources of his Eucharistic doctrine. Even so, the
similarity between the two authors of exegetical method and spiritual interpretation seems to
attest that Castellio knew at least Zwingli’s De vera et falsa religione commentarius.
Zwingli’s understanding of the sacraments develops a notable change during his more mature
years by rejecting that the sacraments conﬁrm faith, as he had held in his earlier works. See
W. Peter Stephens, The Theology of Huldrych Zwingli, Oxford, 1986; W. Peter Stephens, The
Soteriological  Motive  in  Eucharistic  Controversy,  in:  Willem Van’t  Spijker  (Ed.),  Calvin:
Erbe und Auftrag, Kampen, 1991, 203–213. This change in Zwingli’s theology is not dis-
cussed in these pages which refer only to his early works, in particular to De vera et falsa
religione commentarius.

24

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

1) Figurata locutio in the Holy Scriptures

In  the  part  of  Zwingli’s Commentarius  devoted  to  the  Holy  Supper,  the
author founded a new and - in his eyes - more correct understanding of the
mystery of the Eucharist by directly taking a different approach to the text of
the Gospel, whose literal interpretation had supported a dangerous doctrine:
Christ’s body and blood are realiter – bodily – present inside the bread and
the wine 10. In Zwingli’s opinion this pernicious doctrine rose from an idol-
atrous persuasion that every single word of the sacred text, as God’s word,
was absolutely clear and therefore indubitable in its grammatical meaning.
On the contrary, the Zurich theologian observed how the words in the Holy
Scriptures  were  often  de-contextualized  and  inserted  into  other  contexts
where – according to the whole modus argomentandi of the Hebrews – they
assumed a much more extensive meaning than the original one 11. Similarly,
Christ announced its mysteries and described his divine essence using appar-
ently unsuitable terms or obscure similarities whenever interpreted literally,
but which are able to introduce into a much higher truth if explained in a
ﬁgurative way. This disparity between the literal plane and the spiritual sig-
niﬁcance of the divine message characterised the Holy Supper in Zwingli’s
Commentarius.

A few years later, Castellio also found out that the source of all mistakes
and intolerance was based on the inability to recognize the referential nature
often characterizing the Scriptures and, above all, to admit implicit nonsense
in a literal interpretation of the Holy text’s similarities, that is of its ﬁguratae
locutiones 12. This is the starting point of Castellio’s Eucharistic doctrine.

As in our «daily speaking we cannot do without metaphors and metony-
imies» 13, in the same way, the Holy Scripture is often expressed through simi-
litudes and should therefore be interpreted symbolically. For example, the
expression «Christum induisse», wearing Christ, is incomprehensible in its
literal meaning so that nobody thinks we should put Him on «sicuti vestem»,
like a garment. This ﬁgurata locutio instead incites the believers to acquire a
nature similar to the one embodied by the Son of God, that is to say, a right-
eous nature, as it appears clearly from a simple comparison with the steadfast
command in the Gospel to obey the will of the Father 14. The comprehension
of this passage as well as, in general, of other such similarities in Holy Scrip-
ture is not restricted to the literal meaning which is mistaken and gives rise to

10 Huldrich Zwingli, De vera et falsa religione commentarius, Z III, 784.21–786.17; see also:

Huldrich Zwingli, Ratio Fidei, Z VI/II, 806.6–17.

11 Zwingli, Commentarius, 797.
12 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 169–186.
13 Zwingli, Commentarius, 797.25–31.
14 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 170–171.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

25

Stefania Salvadori

endless absurdities. The meaning must be sought, De Arte Dubitandi con-
cludes, in the spiritual truth, through a careful comparison with all the pas-
sages that express the same message in a clearer and surer way 15.

This does not mean that in De Arte Dubitandi Scripture is insufﬁcient or
subject to arbitrary views; it should simply be considered as a historical and
human production – imperfect – which transmits a divine and eternal mes-
sage – absolutely perfect – 16. The incommensurability between the planes is
thereby overcome, according to Castellio, exactly by means of the ﬁgurata
locutio, privileged expression of the saving Truth: it discloses to the reader a
holy message that transcends the formal terms it is expressed with because,
on the one hand, the ﬁgurata locutio bends the timeless divine Truth to the
human expressive limitation and makes it understandable to everyone; on the
other hand, draws this process of adaptation near to the obvious absurdity of
its  literal  meaning  and  therefore  adds  the  implicit  reference  to  a  different
spiritual plane, pointed exclusively by the similarity. What happens, how-
ever, when the surplus of the meaning – spiritual – in comparison with the
signiﬁer – literal – is not recognized in a ﬁgurata locutio as in the case of the
doctrine of the Eucharist?

2) The absurdity of literal interpretations

The main rationale for being satisﬁed with the literal meaning of the sacred
text is based on the fear of converting the unchanging divine truth into the
subject  of  changing  human  interpretations.  Castellio  argues  –  referring  to
opposing theologians – these people often fear the danger that the eternal
Word could be distorted and subjected to the whims of readers and it seems,
therefore, shocking if someone tries to seek additional meanings in the Scrip-
ture; from this point of view, the Gospel is perfectly clear and stable because
it is able to impact directly upon the minds and hearts of the believers.

Quoting Zwingli once again, De Arte Dubitandi rejects this thesis and
notices that these opposing theologians do not always conform themselves to
the rules they have laid down. As they persist in asserting the bodily presence
of Christ in the Eucharist, Castellio maintains, they should also accept the
real identity of the terms in all those passages of the Gospel where the Mes-

15 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 170: «Iam hoc idem in sacris literis, ut sunt foecundae, dicitur
multis variisque modis, quorum partim sunt ﬁgurati, partim non ﬁgurati. At qui sunt ﬁurati,
ii per eos, qui non sunt ﬁgurati, sunt intelligendi atque explanandi, id quod neminem negatu-
rum esse puto.»

16 For  the  description  of  Castellio’s  hermeneutics,  see  Heinz Liebing,  Die  Schriftauslegung
Sebastian Castellios, in: Heinz Liebing, Humanismus-Reformation-Konfession. Beiträge zur
Kirchengeschichte, hrsg. von W. Bienert und W. Hage, Marburg, 1986.

26

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

siah describes himself using various images, naming himself as shepherd [Jn.
10:11], door [Jn. 10:9], stone [Acts 4:11] or way [Jn. 16:6], vine [Jn. 15:5], hus-
bandman  [Mk.  2:19]  or  head  [I. Co.  12:12] 17.  On  the  contrary,  even  these
theologians do not carry their idolatry to that point and recognize that in all
passages Christ is called in various ways «non quia re vera sint illa omnia»:
these pictures clarify his nature and his mission in «similitudo» 18. Accord-
ingly, Castellio infers that these same theologians show, in this way, that they
possess  the  means  of  judgement  indispensable  to  identify  the  implicit
absurdity  of  the ﬁguratae  locutiones’  literal  meaning;  with  the  Eucharist
being an exception.

In order to disavow this contradiction in the argumentation of opponents,
De  Arte  Dubitandi  clariﬁes  the  means  by  which  every  believer  can  and
should recognize similarities and clarify their meaning in comparing them, as
stated previously, with all those passages that express a similar content, but in
a clearer way. This holds true for both the sacred and the profane texts and
allows  for  abandoning  the  literal  meaning  and  ﬁnding  a  symbolic  one  in
which every absurdity disappears 19, whenever a passage, if not interpreted so
ﬁguratively, is opposed to both senses and reason 20.

Senses and reason, therefore, become the best means to locate the mysteri-
ous nature of ﬁguratae locutiones 21 – Castellione concludes, formally agree-
ing with Zwingli – because both of them can never ﬁght against faith 22 and
arouse contra sensus 23.

17 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 174–175. Similarly Zwingli, Commentarius, 797.16–37.
18

 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 175: «Certe si verba urgere volumus, haec omnia et alia multo
plura absurda admittenda sunt. Sin in his ad evitandam absurditatem admittunt interpretatio-
nem et Christum pastorem et portam et lapidem et viam et vitem et sponsum et caput appel-
lari fatentur non quia re vera sint illa omnia, sed quia sit ei cum illis omnibus similitudo,
fateantur idem et in eius esu carnis et potione sanguinis. Neque enim in hoc minor est quam in
illis absurditas, si verba urgeas, et, si Christum fatentur, quamvis se vitem esse dicat, tamen
non esse vitem, nimirum quia et ratio et sensus repugnent, fateantur et, quamvis suam carnem
comedendam esse dicat, tamen non comedi, nimirum quia et ratio et sensus repugnent.»

19 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 175: «Et omnino generalem hanc regulam teneamus, si quod
dictum vel in profanis vel in sacris authoribus eiusmodi est, ut, nisi ﬁgurate accipiatur, mani-
feste rationi aut sensibus repugnet, id esse ﬁgurate accipiendum. Itaque interpretandum, ut
cum ratione aut sensibus concilietur. Erit huius regulae ad multos nodos solvendos incredibi-
lis utilitas.»

20 Zwingli, Commentarius, 798.6–10.
21 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 171: «Iam de quo agitur, videlicet de Christi carne comedenda
et sanguine bibendo, utrum propria an ﬁgurata sit locutio, considerandum est. Figuratam esse
evincit tum ratio tum authoritas.»

22 Zwingli, Commentarius, 784.31–787.40; in particular, 787.17–20: «Breviter: Fides non cogit
sensum sentire fateri, quod non sentit, sed trahit ad invisibilia et spes omnes in ista confert [cf.
Hebr. 11.1]. Non enim versatur inter sensibilia et corporea, neque aliquid cum his in com-
mune habet». Similarly Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 179.

23 For Castellio’s clear distinction between supra sensus – divine mysteries which human senses

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

27

Stefania Salvadori

Starting from similar assumptions, both De Arte Dubitandi and Zwingli’s
Commentarius provide a critique of all those who profess an unreal transub-
stantiation or an incomprehensible consubstantiation 24. Castellio places, in
particular, at the centre of his criticism the physical senses: they touch, hear,
smell, taste, digest nothing but bread and wine so it becomes impossible to
believe – as those theologians who concentrate on a literal interpretation of
the Holy Scripture do – that these elements actually become the body and the
blood of Christ, unless human nature is deprived of all its natural means of
judgement and reduced to an inanimate stone 25.

The same conclusions are drawn, according to Castellio, through the tes-
timony of reason that, ﬁrstly, attests that if anything entering the mouth can
corrupt the spirit [Mt. 15:11], much less will sanctify it, or justify it. Sec-
ondly, if the simple eating of Christ’s body assures eternal life to men, he
would have offered it to all – as he is going to offer universal salvation – and
would consequently have made marginal or unnecessary all precepts and, in
short, the life reform to which he constantly encourages his disciples in order
to reach the salvation. This consequence is, however, clearly unsustainable 26.
Holy  Scripture  too  attests  in  many  passages  that  eternal  life  does  not
spring from a bodily eating in the sacrament, it’s rather the goal reached fol-
lowing the teaching of the Gospel in everyday practice; eternal life means
undertaking  that habitus  iusticiae  that  marks  the  true  believers  by  ethical
behaviour. Salvation insured by Christ «panis vitae» is therefore purely spiri-
tual and has nothing to do with the physical bread dispensed in the Holy
Supper.

The truth of these considerations is ﬁnally testiﬁed, according to Castel-
lio, by Christ in John’s Gospel [Jn. 6:54–56] where he urged his disciples to
eat his body and, as he saw them troubled, reassured them by clarifying his

and  reason  can  not  grasp,  understand  and  judge  –  and contra  sensus  –  absurd  statements
which senses and reason can not understand, but grasp and judge as illogical, contradictory –,
see Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 62–65.
24 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 182–186.
25 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 183: «Atqui in Coena Domini nullus sensus miraculum esse
iudicat contraque omnes sensus ullum ibi miraculum esse negant. Nam et oculi album esse
vident et aures strepitum fracti panis audiunt et nares odorem olfaciunt et manus panem tan-
gunt et palatum saporem sentit et venter ipse panem concoquit, denique nulla res usquam esse
potest, de qua magis omnes sensus iudicent. Itaque necesse est, si velis homini persuadere ibi
esse carnem, ut homini et oculos et aures et nares et manus et palatum et ventrem adimas, hoc
est ut hominem ex homine exuas eumque in stipitem convertas.»

26 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 171–172: «Altera ratio est, quod, si nobis vitam daret esus cor-
poris  Christi,  Christus  omnibus  ad  vitam  consequendam  praecepisset,  ut  corpus  suum
comenderent. Itaque [.. .] omnia eius praecepta, quorum executoribus vitam pollicitus est,
supervacanea forent frustraque homini proposuisset arctam viam.» Similar argumentation in
Zwingli  who  refers,  however,  not  to  Christ’s praecepta,  but  to  his  Resurrection:  Zwingli,
Commentarius, 803.28–31 and 805.16–22.

28

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

intent and by reminding them that «caro nihil prodest. Verba, quae ego Vobis
loquor, spiritus sunt et vita sunt» 27, bodily ﬂesh cannot evolve into spiritual
life, only the words of Jesus, embodied in his discourse, are life-giving, cre-
ating spiritual desire and life in the soul. In this passage lies the solution to
any dispute.

3) Est namely signiﬁcat

In setting the solution to a correct understanding of the Holy Supper in the
sixth  chapter  of  John’s  Gospel,  Castellio  quotes  Zwingli  in  opposition  to
Luther who felt the same chapter entirely alien to the subject of the Eucha-
rist 28. Zwingli, as we know even since the letter-treatise to Matthew Alber in
November 1524, referred to John’s Gospel [Jn. 6:26–65] and he compared it
with  greater  accuracy  to  the  intuition  of  Karlstadt 29  in  order  to  interpret
Christ’s words «this is my body» 30. In a clear-cut departure from both Cath-
olic and Protestant traditions, the Commentarius rejected both the bodily
presence of Christ and his bodily eating in the Eucharistic bread or wine and,
therefore, interpreted the passage ﬁguratively.

In De Arte Dubitandi Castellio uses a similar process by analysing point
by point the same pages of the Gospel, and particularly the passage «caro
nihil prodest. Verba [. . .] et spiritus sunt et vita sunt» 31. With these words
Christ clearly demonstrated, in fact, that the invitation to eat his body and
drink his blood is a ﬁgurata locutio.

As the Samaritan woman had not been able to understand that the water

27 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 172.
28 For the text, see: Martin Luther, De Captivitate babylonica ecclesiae (1520), WA VI, 502–512,
in particular 502: «Primum, c. VI Iohannis in totum est seponendum, ut quod nec sillaba qui-
dem de sacramento loquitur, non modo quod sacramentum nondum esset institutum, sed
multo magis quod ipsa sermonis et sententiarum consequentia de ﬁde, ut dixi, incarnati verbi
Christum loqui clare sostendunt.»

29 Andreas Karlstadt, Von dem widerchristlichen missbrauch des hern brodt und kelch. Ob der
glaub in das sacrament, sünde vergäbe, und ob das sacrament eyn arrabo oder pfand der sünde
vergäbung, per Andreas Cratander, Basel, 1524. To this text refers Zwingli, Commentarius,
792–795. See, for example, Carl M. Leth, Signs and Providence: a study of Ulrich Zwingli’s
sacramental Theology, Duke University, 1992, in particular Cap. VII-VIII, 127–179.

30 Zwingli,  Ad  Matthaeum  Alberum  de  coena  domenica  epistola,  Z  III,  335–354.  Similarly
Zwingli, Commentarius, 773–820, in particular 795: «Difﬁcultas ergo universa non in isto
pronomine ‹hoc› sita est, sed in voce nihilo, quod ad elementorum numerum adtinet, maiore,
puta in verbo ‹est›. Nam ea in sacris literis non uno loco pro ‹signiﬁcat› ponitur.»
See, William Peter Stephens, Zwingli on John 6:63: «Spiritus est qui viviﬁcat, caro nihil prod-
est»,  in:  Biblical  interpretation  in  the  era  of  Reformation.  Essays  presented  to  David C.
Steinmetz in honor of his 60th Birthday, ed. by R. A. Muller and J. L. Thompson, Grand
Rapids, 1996, 156–185.

31

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

29

Stefania Salvadori

offered her by Christ meant the Spirit in a ﬁgurative manner 32, similarly the
sixth chapter of John’s Gospel shows how, after the miracle of the loaves and
ﬁsh, many could only understand in a literal sense the words with which he
named himself as the only true «bread of life» that is able to give eternal sal-
vation: whoever eats it will live forever.

The revelation of the Christ as the living bread of God which was broken
for humanity provoked unbelief and even the disciples found it difﬁcult to
understand and were offended by him. So Christ, «ut offensionem illam tol-
lat», clariﬁed his purpose and warned: «what will you think when you see the
Son of Man going up to where he came from?» [Jn. 6:63]. The fact of his
ascension will indeed remove any idea of a bodily feeding on Christ’s ﬂesh
and blood, that will appear not only – logically – absurd, but also – ontologi-
cally – impossible 33.

Each  single  doubt  and  contradiction  are  easily  resolved  by  the  same
Christ  who  immediately  pointed  out  that  the  disciples  were  offended
because they misunderstood his words, they showed an unspiritual attitude,
namely  one  based  upon  material  considerations.  Of  course  Jesus  talked
about food that gives life; not a physical, but rather a spiritual life in accord-
ance with the spiritual Truth he announces.

Itaque ad alendam hominis animam, quae spiritus est, nihil prodest caro. Atqui
meum corpus caro est, itaque ad hanc rem nihil prodest. Et sane non comedetur,
sed in coelum ascendet. Quid igitur vobis vitam dabit? Spiritus. Nam spiritus is
est, qui vitam dat et mea verba de vita consequenda spiritus sunt, hoc est de spiritu
accipienda sunt, quem ego carnis nomine propter similitudinem appellavi, quo-
niam,  ut  caro  carnem,  sic  spiritus  spiritum  alit  ideoque  animi  panis  sive  cibus
appellatur. 34

Applying the truth declared in this passage directly to the Eucharistic ﬁgu-
rata locutio, Christ deﬁnes himself as the bread of life «propter similitudi-
nem» coherently with the comparison introduced in the Gospel according to
John: as meat or bread or anything physical that nourishes and supports only
the  physical  body,  in  the  same  way  only  the  Divine  Spirit,  that  Christ
announces with his words, gives eternal life to the believers’ soul, nourishes
and supports their spirit 35.

32 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 172.
33 Equivalent to Zwingli, Commentarius, 779–784.
34 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 173.
35 Luther, De Captivitate babylonica ecclesiae, 502: «Primum, c.VI Iohannis in totum est sepo-
nendum, ut quod nec sillaba quidem de sacramento loquitur, non modo quod sacramentum
nondum esset institutum, sed multo magis quod ipsa sermonis et sententiarum consequentia
de ﬁde, ut dixi, incarnati verbi Christum loqui clare sostendunt. Dicit enim ‹verba mea spiri-
tus est et vita sunt›, ostendens se de manducatione spirituali loqui, quo qui comedit, vivit, cum

30

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

On the basis of this similitude, Castellio is able to settle any dispute con-
cerning the interpretation of the Eucharist. The synoptic Gospels provide,
without  great  diversity,  the  same  account  of  the  institution  of  the  Holy
Supper: Christ took bread, he broke off some pieces, and gave them to his
disciples afﬁrming «hoc est corpus meum», «this is my body». In the same
way, then, he took the cup of wine, gave it once again to his disciples saying it
was his blood, shed for the new covenant 36. The hermeneutics of the Scrip-
ture and the clear truth transmitted in John’s Gospel show the absurdity of
this passage, when it is understood literally: nobody can deny this deduction
on the basis of both senses and reason and the very disputes among theolo-
gians conﬁrm it 37.

So, generally the ﬁguratae locutiones conceal behind the literal nonsense a
reference to a further meaning, to a spiritual truth. In the same way the true
value of the Lord’s Supper can be established only by clarifying the metaphor
introduced between body-bread and wine-blood:

Iamque verba illa Coenae: ‹Accipite, comedite, hoc est corpus meum›, sine ulla
dubitatione sic interpretor. Quemadmodum hunc panem fractum vobis ad pastum
porrigo, ita et corpus meum in crucem frangendum trado, quae res vobis sit pastui,
hoc est salutaris. Morior enim ad impetrandam vobis peccatorum veniam, sine qua
salvi esse et vivere non potestis, quemadmodum corporaliter sine cibo vivi non
potest. Quod idem et de vino dico, quae imago est mei sanguinis effundendi. Esto
igitur vobis hic panis imago mei corporis et vinum sanguinis. 38

Following the example of Zwingli 39, Castellio locates the center of the dis-
cussion in the correct understanding of the words «Hoc est corpus meum hic
et sanguis meus» 40: they present no difﬁculties to the senses and reason when
«est» is understood as «signiﬁcat» 41. Christ, in fact, afﬁrms that as he broke

Iudaei de carnali eum intelligerent ideoque litigarent. At nulla manducatio viviﬁcat nisi ﬁdei,
haec enim est vere spiritualis et viva manducatio.» Ibid., 509–512.

36 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 178. The references are to Mt. 26:26; Lc. 12:19; Mt. 26:28–29.
37 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 178–179: «Haec Christi verba sunt. Controversia autem in eo
est, utrum verba illa ‹Hoc est corpus meum et hic est sanguis meus› proprie an ﬁgurate dicta
fuerint. Ad hanc controversiam tollendam meminisse oportet illius, quam paulo supra hunc
locum posui, regulae de ﬁguratis dictis, quae si rationi aut sensibus repugnent, sint interpre-
tatione cum ratione et sensibus concilianda. Rationi autem et sensibus repugnare haec verba,
nisi ﬁgurate dicta accipias, quid opus est probare, cum nihil sit manifestius? Cumque id vel
clarissime ostendant tot theologorum tot et tam acres de hisce verbis disputationes? Nisi enim
ratio sensusque reclamassent, non magis de pane coenae, utrum is vere corpus esset Christi
quam de asino, in quo Christus equitavit, utrum is vere esset asinus, disputassent.»

38 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 180.
39 Zwingli, Commentarius, 782, 785, 791.
40 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 179 and Zwingli, Commentarius, 795ff.
41 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 180–181: «Itaque, ut aliae huius argumenti explanationes, quia
absurdae falsaeque sunt, nulla verborum prolixitate satis aperiri queunt, ita haec contra, quia

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

31

Stefania Salvadori

off and offered his disciples the bread to feed their body, in the same way he
would shortly afterwards deliver his body to death on the cross so that he
would feed them in a new and spiritual way because his own death is «salu-
taris», useful to salvation. Without his sacriﬁce, in fact, their soul could not
live as their body could not exist without the physical food.

According to Castellio, the Eucharistic bread and wine must be under-
stood therefore as a simple «imago», an image, a metaphor of Christ’s body
and  blood  or,  more  generally,  the  Last  Supper  was  an  image  and  fore-
shadowing of His sacriﬁce meant to obtain from the Father the forgiveness
of  humans  sins:  its  meaning  is  purely  spiritual.  Castellio  asks  then,  why
Christ  has  recommended  to  His  disciples  to  renew  the  Eucharistic  cer-
emony?

4) The commemoration

As we have seen, spiritual interpretation of the Eucharist means, both in the
De Arte Dubitandi and in the Commentarius, a clear rejection of any bodily
eating through which grace is bestowed. In this context both authors blame
the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation as well as the Protestant consub-
stantiation for being expressions of groundless scriptural idolatry.

Focusing on the relationship between Castellio and Zwingli, it is evident
that the ﬁrst follows the lesson of the latter not only in the pars destruens of
his reasoning – that is to say in rejecting the literal interpretation of the Scrip-
ture – but also in setting up the following pars construens, namely in confer-
ring to the Holy Supper a new symbolic value: one of commemoration.

According to the Savoyard humanist, in fact, the words with which Christ
instituted this ceremony show clearly how its function is primarily one of
commemoration.  In  it,  indeed,  God’s  Son  wanted  the  disciples  and  the
believers  to  celebrate  the  record  of  his  sacriﬁce,  to  honour  the  memory,
namely, of his unrepeatable death by means of which he achieved eternal life
for his disciples once and for all 42. So, the sacrament does not confer grace,
but it is a symbolic description of grace, of Christ’s beneﬁt already given 43.

apta veraque est, paucissimis verbi expediri potest. Si enim dicas verbum ‹est› in his verbis :
‹Hoc est corpus meum› similitudinis esse, explicaveris omnia.»

43

42 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 177: «Huius autem beneﬁcii memoriam nobis commendare
Christus  volens  ceremoniam  illam  instituit,  quam  Paulus  Coenam  Domini  nuncupat,  qua
cerimonia ipsius mors perenni religione usque ad ipsius adventum recoleretur.»
In «The Sacrament in the Confessions of 1536, 1549, and 1566 – Bullinger’s Understanding in
the Light of Zwingli’s» (Zwing. 33 [2006] 51–76, see, in particular, 54), Peter Stephens stress
how according to Zwingli «the sacraments are related somewhat ambiguously both to faith
and to the Holy Spirit».

32

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

This is the credible, clear, simple truth, based on those assumptions that all
factions can admit 44. Compared with the interpretation proposed in De Arte
Dubitandi – and even before in the Commentarius 45–, all Sophistic specu-
lations,  which  focus  on  the  real  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharistic
elements, are deﬁnitively overcome.

The Eucharistic doctrine based on a correct interpretation of the Holy
Scriptures and freed from its fetters and sectarian fanaticism reaches the aim
it  was  established  for:  it  restores  the  tolerance  among  different  opinions
appealing to the simple truth expressed by the divine Gospel, and it recog-
nizes Christ’s unrepeatable sacriﬁce as the only means of salvation for believ-
ers  who  must  remember  it  through  the  Eucharistic  celebration.  Yet,  this
spiritual interpretation involves, according to Castellio, a more precise the-
oretical settlement, which leads him to conclusions that differ radically from
those suggested by Zwingli.

While trying to deﬁne which was the symbolic signiﬁcance of the Eucha-
ristic bread, Zwingli did not hesitate to identify it with the faith in the Gos-
pel, so that the celebration of the Lord’s Supper could be claimed to signify
only the remembering of the unrepeatable forgiveness of sins granted to men
by Christ once and for all with His death on the cross. Although up to this
point, as we have seen, De Arte Dubitandi does not differ from the Commen-
tarius, the latter thereafter becomes the target of Castellio’s confutation: eat-
ing Christ’s body – in the spiritual sense – is not equivalent to believing in
Him 46.

5) Comedere not est credere: Castellio’s turning point.

If we consider carefully the intent of Zwingli’s interpretation, this seems to
consist in the substantial equation between Eucharistic mystery and faith re-
jected by Castellio: the true object of the former matches, in De vera et falsa

44 Castellio, De  Arte  Dubitandi,  180:  «Hanc  cognita,  admissa  tolluntur  omnes  offensiones,
omnia disputationum dispendia, omnia absurditatum monstra, quibus ecclesia per tot secula
vexata lacerataque est. In hac nihil absurdi, nihil incredibilis, nihil obscuri, nihil quod vel a
sacrorum aut profanorum authorum vel ab omnium gentium consuetudine loquendi vel ab
hominis ratione sensibusve discrepet. Quin omnia apta, credibilia, aperta, plana et caetero-
rum, quae citra ullam controversiam ab omnibus admittuntur similima.»

45 Zwingli, Commentarius, 798.35–799.8.
46 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 174: «Similiter igitur et in sexto Iohannis capite occasionem
sumpsit de pane loquendi ex eo, quod ipsum quaerebant Iudaei, quia de panibus illis ad satie-
tatem comederant. Hanc ob causam ibi se panem appellat propter similitudinem, videlicet
quod,  quemadmodum  pane  comedendo  corpus,  sic  Christo  comedendo  alatur  anima.  Est
autem Christum comedere non equidem credere (sicuti quidam putant).»

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

33

Stefania Salvadori

religione commentarius, directly with the latter 47. In other words the «panis
vitae» that Christ used to refer to his body in the sixth chapter of John’s Gos-
pel 48 was speciﬁcally faith in Him 49. Only true faith is the spiritual nourish-
ment 50  in  which  the  believers  will  ﬁnd  eternal  satisfaction  for  their  inner
thirst 51.

From this point of view, both for Castellio and for Zwingli, eating Christ’s
body and drinking his blood does not mean obtaining the forgiveness of past
sins each single time, but, as we have seen, believing in his death 52, which
once and for all «valet ad omnia omnium exhaurienda peccata» 53. Yet, while
sharing the ﬁrst part of this Eucharistic interpretation, De Arte Dubitandi
explicitly rejects the conclusion announced by Zwingli’s Commentarius, i. e.
its perfect and absolute equation between the words «corpus-panis-ﬁdes»
and replaces it with the relation «corpus-panis-iusticia» instead. What does
the word ‹justice› mean according to Castellio and why does he judge it more
appropriate to replace the concept of faith as fundamental meaning of the
Eucharist?

In addition to the simple terminological shift «ﬁdes-iustitia», the incom-
patibility  of  Castellio’s  and  Zwingli’s  soteriological  model  –  and  thus  a
Christological one as well, because only Christ gives Salvation to his faithful
ones – should be grasped in order to clarify their different foundations of the

47 Zwingli,  Commentarius,  775:  «Tenemus  ergo  nunc  ipso  nomine,  quid  eucharistia,  id  est,
coena  dominica,  sit  nempe:  gratiarum  actio  et  communis  gratulatio  eorum  qui  mortem
Christi annunciant hoc est: ebuccinant, laudant, conﬁtentur ac unice exaltant.»

48 Zwingli, Commentarius, 777: «Dixit ergo Iesus: ‹Ego sum panis vitae›; cum audissent ergo
Iudaei Christum dicere, quod panis, qui de coelo descenderet, vitam daret mundo, optabant
sibi semper hunc panem dari. Iesus autem intelligens, quod sensum evangelii non caperent,
exponit, quisnam sit iste panis tam viviﬁcus, ut mundum totum possit vitalem facere et dicit:
‹Ego sum panis vitae. Qui ergo ad me venit, hoc est: qui mihi inseritur, qui me recipit, nul-
latenus esuriet›. Quod autem hic ‹venit› pro ‹recipit› accipiatur, sequentia verba indicat ‹Qui
me ﬁdit, non sitiet.› Fides ergo est, quae famen ac sitim omnes sedat.»

49 Zwingli, Commentarius, 776: «Operamini cibum, qui non perit, et alium non inveniemus esse
quam Christo ﬁdamus. Cibo ergo iste, de quo Christo loquitur, ﬁdes est. [.. .] Quaerere enim
iubet cibum qui non pereat, et hoc nihil aliud est, quam operari opus dei. Porro opus dei hoc
est, quo ﬁdetur ﬁlio, quem pater misit. Est ergo cibus, quem quaerere iubet, ﬁdere ﬁlio. Fides
igitur cibus est, de quotam graviter per totum hoc capite [Jn. 6] disserit.»

50 Zwingli, Commentarius, 777: «Fides ergo est, quae famen ac sitim omnem sedat. Sed quam
famen, aut quam sitim? Animae nimirum. Fides ergo in Christum sola est, quae mentem satiat
ac potat, ut nihil amplius desit.»

51 Zwingli, Commentarius, 786–790.
52 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 165 and Zwingli, Commentarius, 779.
53 Zwingli,  Commentarius,  803–804:  «Falsa  ergo  religionis  est,  quae  docuit  huius  simbolici
panis usum peccata delere; nam Christum solum delet peccata, quum moritur. Mortus est
autem semel tantum, ut tota epistola ad Hebraeos et Roma. 6. habetur. Semel ergo mortuus
perpetuo valet ad omnia omnium exhaurienda peccata. Falsa est religio, quae docuit hunc
panem opus aut oblationem esse, quae quotidie oblata peccata nostra expiet.»

34

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

Eucharist. Castellio’s statement «comedere non est credere» can be under-
stood, therefore, only in the light of its deepest theological implications.

In order to isolate the breaking point between the two authors it is useful,
ﬁrst of all, to focus on the respective model of faith to which they refer. As far
as to the constitutive elements of these models are concerned, Castellio posits
– in total opposition to Zwingli – that faith should not be understood simply
as a divine gift in which salvation is given sola gratia to the sinner, but as the
ﬁrst  step  towards  a  longer  and  much  more  complex  process  of  spiritual
regeneration. More speciﬁcally, faith is realized essentially in the free human
choice to follow Christ, in the courage to accept the challenge he embodied
and, in so doing, by exercising diligence in order to obtain the knowledge of
Truth and eternal life 54.

In other words, according to Castellio faith is not a «cognitio Dei» given
as fulﬁllment of an ascribed justiﬁcation that is, in his eyes, only nominal 55;
faith is not «sperandarum substantia rerum, argumentum not apparentium»
[Heb. 9:1] 56, but, rather, conﬁdence, an act of human will 57, trusting in Christ
known as the only one able to make sinners willing to accept his doctrine and
to obey the Father 58. Faith inaugurates and supports, therefore, a behaviour
that is consistent with what is believed, with Christ’s Gospel, but does not
ensure the ﬁnal salvation which remains partly tied to the individual’s good
will 59. This ethically correct practice alone, which is always open to error and
fault – since it is directed, but not exhausted, by faith 60 – allows for obtaining
a gradual growth in real «iustitia», that is the true bread of life, «panis vitae».
To put it brieﬂy, the different conception of faith in its substance – as a
divine gift according to Zwingli, as a partly free-chosen conﬁdence according
to Castellio – and its purpose – necessary and sufﬁcient reason for the Sal-
vation according to Zwingli, simple beginning of the long process of ethical

54 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 52: «Est igitur credere dictis seu veris seu falsis ﬁdem habere.
Saepe enim non minus creditur falsis quam veris, id quod de sciendo dici non potest, quippe
falsa quae sunt, sciri non possunt, at credi possunt. Denique ﬁdes Christiana virtus est, id
quod nemo inﬁciabitur. At scientia quomodo virtus est, non video nec eam in sacris literis ut
virtutem laudari comperio, nisi forte scientiae verbum alicubi pro affectu ponatur, de qua hic
non agimus. Et, ut paucis absolvam, ubi scientia incipit, ibi ﬁdes desinit, ut, qui ante dixit
‹Credo›, idem iam dicat ‹Scio›.»

55 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 143–154.
56 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 93.
57 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 89–90
58 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 92.
59 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 52–53
60 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 126: «Non enim ita iustum reddit hominem Christus, ut non
possit non peccare, sed ut possit non peccare. Quemadmodum non ita sanabat claudos, ut
non possint claudicare, sed ut possent non claudicare. Ita ﬁt ut quod isti propter eiusmodi
delicta negant credentium iusticiam coram deo consistere male negent. Deo enim re vera ius-
tus et est et habetur is, in quo inest spiritus iusticiae, etiam si quid aliquando delinquat.»

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

35

Stefania Salvadori

regeneration according to Castellio – illuminates the essential divergence in
soteriological planes to which we must ultimately refer to in order to resolve
the Eucharistic issue.

The  shift  in  perspective  adopted  by  Castellio  in  rejecting  the  equation
«panis-ﬁdes»  must  be  assessed  from  a  more  general  point  of  view:  he
attempts to interpret the Holy Supper as a ﬁgurative representation of the
complex change «ex iniusto iustum», of a slow transition – which is not redu-
cible to faith – from the state of sinner, which generates death, to that of a just
man, which ensures eternal life. This conversion, which is made possible only
by Christ through him being the true bread of life 61, consists in the accom-
plishment of his beneﬁcium which is, as asserted in similar formal terms in
the Reformation, twofold: forgiveness of past sins by the Father – the subject
of faith – and award of the spirit of righteousness, of the spiritum iustiﬁcum –
purpose of practice –. With the difference that, according to De Arte Dubi-
tandi, both are unable to assure salvation without free human obedience and
ethical engagement 62.

To conclude, Castellio interprets the convergence between the Christo-
logical model and a soteriological dynamic, i.e. between the two beneﬁts of
Christ  and  their  practical  effect  in  the  believer’s  life  as  represented  in  the
Holy Supper. Eating the Christ-bread of life is not equivalent to believing in
him, but rather is trusting his teaching, to become realiter a just man. Eating
the Christ-bread of life means following the model he embodied even in his
sacriﬁce,  letting  the  «spiritus  iustiﬁcum»  he  released  in  its  second  beneﬁt
bear divine fruit in human daily life 63.

61 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 169: «Quoniam de Christi beneﬁcio disserimus et de Coena
Domini  (quae  est  ipsa  quoque  Christi  beneﬁcium)  graves  sunt  controversiae,  dicendum
aliquid de ea est.»

62 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 177: «Hac igitur forma loquendi comedere Christi carnem et
bibere sanguinem est eam utilitatem percipere, quam ipsae suae carnis et sanguinis precio (hoc
est sua obedientia, quae tanta fuit, ut vitam pro nobis profunderit) nobis peperit. Est autem ea
utilitas venia peccatorum et spiritum iustiﬁcus, sicuti supra de Christo beneﬁcio disserentes
demonstravimus.» For the twofold essence of Christ’s Beneﬁts, see Ibidem, 154–169.

63 Castellio, De  Arte  Dubitandi,  174:  «Est  autem  Christum  comedere  non  equidem  credere
(sicuti quidam putant), sed Christi spiritum sive naturam (id quod ﬁt credendo) comedere,
hoc est ex iniusto iustum ﬁeri, quae res animae est salutaris et vitalis. Ut enim iniusticia ani-
mam interﬁcit, ita et iusticia eidem vitam dat. Christum autem appellare Christianitatem, hoc
est Christi naturam sive spiritum sacris literis familiare est et nominatim Paulo [.. .]. Hic quod
priore loco Christi spiritum appellaverat, idem posteriore Christum appellat et mox iusti-
ciam, per quam hominis spiritus vivat.»

36

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

6) Sermo verax and obedience: Christological requirement

to the Lord’s Supper

Castellio chose to deal with the debate on the Holy Supper, as we have seen,
because it is part of a set of issues – together with the Trinity and the doctrine
of Justiﬁcation – on which Christianity is torn by violence and intolerance.
The concordia, the agreement among various interpretations can be achieved
only by focusing on the simplicity of Christ’s preaching and life.

In order to conduct the debate in a suitable way, Castellio clariﬁes the
theoretical background on which it is placed and introduces two fundamen-
tal assumptions: the essential link between Eucharist and Christi Beneﬁcium,
on the one hand, and the identiﬁcation of «panis vitae» with Christ’s self, on
the  other  hand.  The  meaning  conferred  to  these  two  conditions  sets  the
limits which allow for both an upholding and a critique of Zwingli’s theori-
zation.

The  understanding  of  both  prerequisites  is  premised  upon  further
research into the nature against which Christ as the bread of life 64 is set or,
from an opposite point of view, into the essence of the medicine which alone
frees from the mortal food that spread death among men. The Holy Scrip-
tures evidently show how this mortal food is the «sermonem mendacem»,
the false speech of the serpent who, in the Eden, tempted Adam to disobey
the Father thus condemning him to guilt and eternal death. Following, then,
the infallible rule according to which against each disease an opposite remedy
must be used, Christ opposes to the serpent’s poison his «Sermo verax», i.e.
his truthful and heavenly doctrine that has a concrete and undeniable effect:
it forces believers to obey the Father and so leads them to eternal life 65.

The food which is dispensed in the Holy Supper is thus directly identiﬁed
with Christ, not as Man and God 66 – which remains to Castellio a mysterium
on which it is not possible to make any judgement – but as sermo, as divine
speech, as spreader of God’s doctrine, as divine rhetorician, as doctor of the
soul 67.

64 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 169: «Igitur quoniam coena nomen est epularum et in ea agitur
de  cibo  vitali,  quem  Christum  esse  constat,  ante  omnia  cognoscendum  est,  quo  pacto  sit
Christus cibus homini eique vitam conferat».

65 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 169–170. Similar argumentation in Sebastian Castellio, De l’im-
punité des hérétiques – De haeretici non puniendis, ed. par Bruno Becker et Marc Valkhoff,
Genève, 1971, 52–54 and in Sebastian Castellio, Defensio ad authorem libri, cui titulus est,
calumniae nebulonis, in Scripta selecta et rarissima, Francfurti am Moenum, 1696, 413–479.
66 Zwingli, Commentarius, 779: «Videndum est hic obiter, quod Christus nobis ea parte saluta-
ris est, qua de coelo descendit, non qua ex illibatissima quidem virgine natus est, tametsi se-
cundum ea pati ac mori oportuerit; sed nisi deus simul fuisset, qui moriebatur, non potuisset
toti mundo salutaris esse.»

67 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 154–156.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

37

Stefania Salvadori

In this way Castellio not only quotes the comment of Erasmus on John
1:1 where the word «Sermo» 68 was preferred to the Vulgate «verbum», but
also recalls the well-known Philosophia Christi and its model of ethical beha-
vior. All these elements are certainly developed and widely referred to several
times in De Arte Dubitandi in order to describe the Christological partici-
pation  into  the  soteriological  process 69.  Castellio  goes,  however,  a  step
farther  than  Erasmus  in  linking  this  semantic  clariﬁcation  directly  to  the
symbolic interpretation of the Holy Supper: the «panis vitae» is, in fact, the
announcement of God’s Son that alone saves the believers from the false and
deadly serpent and constantly urges – but not forces – them to act in concrete
and free obedience towards the Father.

This Christological model shows the genuine meaning of the key passage
of Castellio’s Eucharistic interpretation: «caro nihil prodest. Verba, quae ego
Vobis loquor, spiritus sunt et vita sunt». Christ describes his spiritual mes-
sage and mission explaining how it is not his body, but his words, his teach-
ing, his announcement that is spirit and life. Christ-Sermo must be intended
as  the  rhetorical  persuasive  ability,  the  heavenly  doctrine  which  makes
sinners  change  into  true  believers.  This  Christus-Sermo  summarises  and
speciﬁes the true, symbolic meaning of the Holy Supper 70.

Finally, in response to those who, by quoting the Scriptures, argue that
Adam  has  been  corrupted  by  physically  eating  an  apple,  Castellio  under-
scores how, even in this case, a ﬁgurative register is used in order to indicate
that the damnation to which Adam is condemned springs from his disobedi-
ence and not from the act of eating the forbidden fruit. The Genesis Text,
therefore, conﬁrms Castellio’s theory: in the same way as the ﬁrst man was
ruined because of his rebellion, so the true believer can be puriﬁed and saved
not by physically eating the body of Christ, but by obeying his teaching and
doing God’s will 71.

Obedience is therefore the concrete consequence of righteousness, of the
Eucharistic  eating  in  human  life  as  well  as  the  concrete  consequence  of
Christ’s twofold beneﬁts, that of trusting in Christ-Sermo and that of fol-
lowing the divine teaching he embodied. Yet, to Castellio this obedience is
concrete, realiter, because it does not match the faith: it is related not only to
the power of divine justice, but also to the reformed life that each believer

68 Desiderius Erasmus, Evangelium secundum Johannem, I,1, in: Novum Testamentum, cum

Adnotationes, LB VI, coll. 335–338.

69 For Castellio’s debt to Erasmus see, in particular, the fundamental monographic study Gug-

gisberg, Sebastian Castellio, in particular Chapters IV, V and X.

70 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 170: «Affert igitur Christus homini vitam verace illo sermone
suo, dum eo sermone persuadet homini, ut veritati obediat, cui obediendo vitam consequatur,
sicut Adamus contra mendacio obediendo mortem sibi conﬂavit.»
Ibid.

71

38

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

puts into practice. This spiritual interpretation introduces a wider value than
that of faith, as for Zwingli’s understanding, and thus gains a new dimension
of reality.

7) Spiritual manducatio and Justice: the spiritual reality of the Last Supper

On the basis of these Christological assumptions it is ﬁnally possible to clar-
ify why Castellio argues against the identity between bread and faith, as pro-
posed by Zwingli, and suggests a different understanding of the Eucharist
where «cibum homini vitalem esse Christianam iusticiam et Christum com-
edere  esse  aliud  nihil  quam  Christianitate  comedere,  hoc  est  Christianum
sive iustum ﬁeri», the vital food is Christian righteousness and eating Christ
means eating his righteousness, i.e. becoming Christian, a righteous man 72.
In Castellio’s opinion, the shift runs from the purely spiritual level of faith
to the real one – but it is still spiritual, and therefore irreconcilable with the
mere  physicality  of  bread  and  wine  –  related  to  the  ethical  experience  to
which every believer should daily devote himself/herself, according to the
example of obedience offered by Christ. Christian righteousness is dispensed
as vital food in the Eucharist, and that explains to believers «quo pacto Chris-
tum  in  spiritu  et  veritate,  hoc  est  spiritualiter  et  vere  comedat»,  the  way
Christ is eaten in spirit and truth 73. According to Castellio, faith is useful but
not sufﬁcient to this aim: its being equated to the bread of life restricts the
Eucharist into purely spiritual terms and makes believers passive with regard
to the Soteriological way.

Castellio seems to ﬁnd in this way his personal solution to the Eucharistic
debate by reconciling Zwingli’s spiritual interpretation with a new under-
standing of its reality in the concept of righteousness. Firstly, De Arte Dubi-
tandi  bases  its  original  proposal  on  a  speciﬁcation  of  terminology:  in  the
sacred texts the term «comedi res», eating something, is often used as a syn-
onym for «cuius fructus comeditur aut a qua utilitas percipitur», enjoying
the beneﬁt of what, for similarity, is eaten 74. In other words, the ﬁgured sense
that was previously established to be sought in order to clarify Christ’s invi-
tation to his disciples to eat his body is now understood as an exhortation to
take maximum utility from his teaching.

Hac igitur forma loquendi comedere Christi carnem et bibere sanguinem est eam
utilitatem percipere, quam ipse suae carnis et sanguinis precio (hoc est sua obedi-
entia, quae tanta fuit, ut vitam pro nobis profuderit) nobis peperit. Est autem ea

72 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 174.
73 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 186.
74 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 177.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

39

utilitas venia peccatorum et spiritus iustiﬁcus, sicuti supra de Christo beneﬁcio
disserentes demonstravimus. Huius autem beneﬁcii memoriam nobis commen-
dare Christus volens ceremoniam illa instituit, [.. .]. Est autem sciendum non esse
idem Christi corpus comedere, hoc est Christianum sive iustum ﬁeri, et eius mor-
tis memoriam hac ceremonia celebrare. 75

Stefania Salvadori

In summary, according to the way Scripture is often expressed, eating the
body and drinking the blood of Christ means to perceive and achieve – «per-
cipere» 76 – the beneﬁt – «utilitatem» – which he obtained for us with his sac-
riﬁce,  namely,  to  perceive  by  faith  and  then  achieve  through  a  personal
engagement the two beneﬁts he gives: the forgiveness of past sins for which
believers must trust as a conditio sine qua non of the salvation that is possible
and the bestowal of the «spiritum iustiﬁcum», the Spirit that makes right-
eous, that guides but does not ﬁx human ethical behavior 77. The link between
both of these beneﬁts of Christ is the criterion to grasp Castello’s original
contribution in comparison with Zwingli.

As we have seen in regard to faith, for Castellio as well the spiritual right-
eousness  offered  by  Christ  is  not  merely  a  free  gift  of  God,  untied  from
human will and donated with the «ﬁdes-cognitio Dei», but it is also a reward
that the true believer must deserve because of the effort of pursuing concrete
obedience 78. Spiritual righteousness, iustitia, is the goal that the believer has
to conquer supported by spiritus iustiﬁcum in a daily ﬁght against the temp-
tation of evil and the weakness of the ﬂesh 79. Spiritual righteousness is, in
short,  both  human  obedience  and  divine  assistance,  free  moral  praxis  and
obeying Christ’s teaching 80.

The last reason for the refusal of Zwingli equating bread of life with faith
«panis  vitae-ﬁdes»  is  now  clear:  reducing  the  ﬁrst  to  the  second  means,
according to Castellio, denying the worth, the real and spiritual sense of the
Holy  Supper;  it  means  drastically  minimizing  the  concrete  fulﬁlment  of

75

Ibidem. For the reference to the description of Christ’s twofold beneﬁt, see Castellio, De Arte
Dubitandi, 154–169.

76 For  Castellio  the  verb  «percipere»,  «to  perceive»  has  a  twofold  meaning:  as  intellectual
understanding and, at the same time, as concrete fruition. According to the deﬁnition in the
Thesaurus  Linguae  Latinae,  Omnia  per  Caelium  Secundum  Curionem  hac  nova  editione
concinnata, cum eiusdem praefatione, in qua & ratio huius editionis, & ut commode quis hoc
opere uti possit, via & modus indicatur, Froben, Basileae, 1561, 4 Voll, Vol. II, 898–899.

77 For Castellio’s doctrine of Justiﬁcation, in particular for the connection faith-justice in Cas-
tellio’s soteriology, see Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 143–154. A general, but useful critical
introduction to that issue is provided in Buisson, Sébastien Castellion, Vol. II, Cap. XIX: Cas-
tellion théologien et moraliste, 194–215.
78 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 143–145.
79 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 147–150.
80 For  Castellio’s  detailed  analysis  of  the  cooperation  between  human  free  will  and  Christ’s
Spirit of righteousness, see Sebastian Castellio, An possit homo per spiritus sanctum perfecte
obedire legi Dei, in: Dialogi IV, Gouda, 1696, 246–263.

40

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

Christ’s beneﬁts in human life; it means subtracting the believers from the
responsibilities of their free choice for or against God and converting Chris-
tian righteousness into a ﬁctitious justice 81.

To Castellio, Zwingli shifts – but does not solve – the discussion from the
bodily presence of Christ in bread and wine to the transcendence of faith:
when considered sufﬁcient to ensure the salvation to men, they both make
Christian  righteousness  completely  lacking  of  concreteness,  i.e.  of  sense
because they reduce it to just the necessary consequence of God’s will. In this
way Christian righteousness seems not to constitute a virtue in itself, but a
mere proof of the grace received. On the contrary, in De Arte Dubitandi
Christian iustitia is not a result bestowed by faith, but the – not a – Christian
virtue:  through  faith  the  believer  has  the  opportunity  to  really  become  a
righteous  man  acting  as  Christ  taught,  embodying  the  Lord’s  example  in
himself.

In  order  to  clarify  how  the  recovery  and  rejection  of  Zwingli’s  thesis
coalesce in De Arte Dubitandi or, more precisely, in order to determine the
relationship between faith and justice in the Eucharist according to Castellio,
it is necessary to brieﬂy recall his soteriological model.

In Castellio’s opinion faith and righteousness are not mutually exclusive:
they are distinct but indissoluble moments of the circular soteriological pro-
cess 82. Faith – as complete conﬁdence in the forgiveness of past sins obtained
from the Father through the death on the cross of His Son and as trust in
Christ’s teaching – opens the way of salvation. Regenerated by the sacriﬁce
of Christ, the sinner can not be regarded as a righteous man by the mere fact
of believing: he must demonstrate concretely his progressive improvement in
acting freely, he has to make good use in his daily life of the «spiritus iustiﬁ-
cum», conferred by Christ, and the effectiveness of which in healing the soul
is well represented in the Gospel.

During this process of real – because actually lived by the believer in his
daily acting – and progressive - because developing in a gradual improvement
during his lifetime – justiﬁcation, true Christians strengthen their starting

81

See, for example, Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 132–133: «Quod si quis hanc quoque cordis
mundaciam imputativam esse putat, nihil causae et cur non et ipsam dei visionem imputati-
vam  esse  putet.  Cum  enim  ipsius  cordis  oculis  videndus  sit  deus,  non  nisi  mundis  videri
potest. Sicuti lucem non nisi mundis oculis videmus. Quod si non re vera sed imputative
deum videbimus, non re vera sed imputative beatis erimus: quandoquidem beatitas est videre
deum. Ita ﬁt ut dum isti omnibus modis imputativam, hac est imaginariam faciunt iusticiam,
etiam beatitatem imputativam faciant.». In this chapter devoted to the Holy Supper, the target
of Castellio’s criticism is obviously the doctrine of imputative Justiﬁcation, which this pages
can not in detail describe. A general, but useful critical introduction to that issue is provided
once  again  in: Buisson,  Sébastien  Castellion,  Vol.  II,  Cap.  XIX:  Castellion  théologien  et
moraliste, 194–215

82 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 109.

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

41

Stefania Salvadori

faith step by step by renewing the choice to act according to God’s will and
they are supported in the commemoration of the Eucharistic sacriﬁce repre-
sented in the Holy Supper with the ecclesiastic community 83.

The link between Eucharistic celebration, the doctrine of justiﬁcation and
Christology is the ﬁnal background of the debate. The Holy Supper offers in
fact a symbolic representation of the twofold value dues to Christ’s sacriﬁce
and of its concrete consequences in human life. According to Castellio, the
merits of Zwingli’s spiritual interpretation of the Eucharist must certainly be
acknowledged, but they must be supplemented by a broader reference to the
concept of genuine righteousness in place of that of faith. As we have seen,
Castellio’s personal contribution consists precisely in this integration.

Abstract

This article considers how far Castellio’s Eucharistic doctrine is Zwinglian
by reference to De Arte Dubitandi and De vera et falsa religione commenta-
rius. In debate with Roman Catholics and Lutherans about the physical pres-
ence of Christ in the Eucharistic elements, both authors denied any real con-
nection between the bread and wine and the body and blood of Christ and
argued that «hoc est corpus meum» is to be interpreted ﬁguratively: as the
body cannot be fed by a spiritual substance, neither can the soul be fed by a
bodily substance, so the bread of life, «panis vitae», dispensed in the Holy
Supper and assuring eternal life to believers is spiritual food. Yet the breaking
point between the two authors stems exactly from the spiritual interpretation
of this sacrament: according to Castellio eating Christ’s body – in the spiri-
tual sense – is not the equivalent of believing in Him, as the Commentarius
asserted.

On  the  basis  of  a  particular  Christological  model De  Arte  Dubitandi
relates the spiritual meaning of the Holy Supper to the effect of Christ’s two-
fold beneﬁt in the real, ethical experience to which every believer must daily
devote himself/herself. The bread of life is therefore not equivalent to faith,
but represents the development of the divine message embodied by Christ,
his example of obedience, his Spirit of Righteousness which guides – but does
not force – free human effort to obey the Father in daily life and gain sal-
vation through right acting. The true spiritual meaning of Holy Supper is

83 Castellio, De Arte Dubitandi, 177: «Est autem sciendum non esse idem Christi corpus com-
edere, hoc est Christianum sive iustum ﬁeri, et euius mortis memoriam hac cerimonia cele-
brare.  Hoc  enim  saepe,  illud  non  nisi  semel  ﬁt,  et  sine  hoc  servari  homo  potest;  eius  rei
exemplum est vel latro ille, qui in cruce credidit in Christum, at sine illo non item. Itaque in
hac cerimonia non ﬁt homo iustus, sed iam iustus factus hac cerimonia fungitur.»

42

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

Sebastian Castellio and the Holy Supper: re-reading Zwingli in the pursuit of tolerance

thus summarized in the word «iustitia», righteousness that means both the
Spirit delivered in the second Christ’s beneﬁt and the human free obedience
to the Father following Christ’s example.

Dr. Stefania Salvadori, Zurich

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

43

Stefania Salvadori

44

Zwingliana XXXV, 2008

