Kozma Ahacˇ icˇ

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

Primus Truber as the First Slovenian Translator of Scriptural Texts

by Kozma Ahacˇ icˇ

The method employed by Slovenian Protestant writers in translating biblical
texts 1 (that is, texts which were not adapted but translated in the modern
sense of the term) has been the subject of many studies. The numerous re-
searches, however, have provided no reliable key to these writers’ basic pro-
cedures in translating biblical texts into Slovenian. Some scholars based their
discussions of the source texts on the claims of the Protestant writers them-
selves, rather than on analysis, while those who did conduct analyses focused
on details rather than on the overall concept, or else lacked access to all the
texts required for such analyses.

Our analysis of the Bible translations by Slovenian Protestant writers, 2
the  results  of  which  are  outlined  in  the  present  article,  has  therefore  en-
compassed passages from all such translations, comparing them to all poten-
tial source texts. The ﬁndings include a fascinating discovery: in translating
the Psalms, the ﬁrst Slovenian translator of the Bible, Primus Truber [Primoˇz
Trubar] (1508–1586), 3 relied not only on Luther’s translation but, above all,
on the annotated Latin translation by Wolfgang Musculus and the German
translation by Rudolph Gwalther. This in turn indicates the wide inﬂuence
exerted by the last two authors in the Slovenian-speaking areas of the 16th
century.

1. A Survey of the Major Studies to Date

Truber’s translation work has been studied by many researchers to date. A
detailed discussion of Truber’s translation of the Gospels has been provided

Biblical texts are the only group of texts where Slovenian Protestant writers never allowed
themselves occasional interpretative departures from their sources. The Postils, on the other
hand, translated from German sources, reveal occasional divergences, which are only to be
expected.

1

3

2 Kozma Ahacˇicˇ, Zgodovina misli o jeziku in knjiˇzevnosti: protestantizem, Ljubljana 2007,

257–282.
Truber published his Scripture translations in the following works: TE 1555, TT 1557, TT
1560, TL 1561, TPs 1566, TL 1567, TT 1577, TT 1581–82. They are most readily accessible in
the edition: Biblia Slavica 4/3, Paderborn 2006.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

115

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

by Ivan Grafenauer. 4 Having collected the key statements of Truber himself
on  his  translation  procedures  and  sources,  he  conducted  a  comparative
analysis  of  Matthew  2,13–18  in  the  Greek  original,  the  Vulgate,  and  the
translations by Truber and Luther. While Grafenauer brilliantly comments
on Truber’s claims about his knowledge of particular languages, he unfortu-
nately seems to have lacked access to Erasmus’ translation, as well as to cer-
tain other – correctly identiﬁed – sources. Thus it is a further misfortune
that he should have chosen to analyse precisely TE 1555, where the oscil-
lation between Luther’s and Erasmus’ inﬂuence is strongest. It was for this
reason  that  Grafenauer  –  as  will  be  shown  later  –  partly  drew  the  wrong
conclusions:

«Truber based his translation on Luther’s. In certain places, however, where he
found Luther’s translation too free, he drew closer to the Vulgate, basing some
passages partly on Luther and partly on the Vulgate. In addition, there remains a
handful of passages where Truber may have adhered to other sources, which will
require a closer examination [.. .]»

Anton Breznik, 5 in his article on the literary tradition in «Evangeliji in listi»,
concludes  that  Truber’s  translations  of  the  Psalms  mainly  follow  the  Vul-
gate.

A Czech scholar, Václav Burian, published in 1928 a much-cited work on
the traces of Czech literature in older Slovenian texts, 6 which also addresses
the inﬂuence of the Czech literature and language on Truber’s translation
solutions  and  language.  Since  his  conclusions  are  most  often  presented  as
proven facts, it should be noted that we ﬁnd many of his claims inaccurate
and mistaken.

In  his  preface  to  the  Glagolitic  ﬁrst  part  of  the  New  Testament  from
1562, 7 Truber reports that the (Croatian) New Testament was being trans-
lated via more than one Latin, German, Italian, and – on account of certain
older words – even Czech translation of the Bible, although the translators
chieﬂy followed the versions by Erasmus and Luther. From this statement,
Burian concludes that Truber must have drawn on words from the 1540 ut-
raquist  Czech  Bible  (Cˇ eská  biblí)  in  his  Slovenian  New  Testament  trans-
lations as well. To prove his claim, he adduces parallel passages from the 1540
Czech Bible, Truber’s translation, Luther’s translation, and the Vulgate. Ac-
cording to Burian, Truber would have resorted to Czech in employing such

Ivan Grafenauer, O Trubarjevem prevodu evangelijev, in: Dom in svet 27, 1914, 297–303.

4
5 Anton Breznik, Literarna tradicija v ‘Evangelijih in listih’ [1. del], in: Dom in svet 30 (1917),

170–174.
Václav Burian, Po stopách cˇesˇství acˇeské knihy v starsˇím slovinském písemnictví, in: Slavia 8
(1928), 14–46.

6

7 Cf. Mirko Rupel, Slovenski protestantski pisci, Ljubljana 1966, 131.

116

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

words as mosˇnja, sluˇzabnik, aneˇz, vodec, bogastvo (‹bog›), milost, etc. These
words,  however,  already  occur  in  works  written  or  published  before
Truber’s earliest translations of the Scripture! 8 Moreover, Burian’s sugges-
tion  that  words  such  as mirnik,  zmirnik,  moˇzica,  pomilosrdje,  porocˇenje,
obraz, nedomiseln, etc. might have been transferred by Truber to Slovenian
with the aid of Reschelius’ [Resˇl’s] Dictionarium latino-bohemicum (1560)
or Dictionarium Bohemico-latinum (1562) is highly questionable, for most
of the words listed there may be traced in Truber’s writings at least since
1557.

France Kidricˇ 9 cites the conclusions reached by Breznik and Grafenauer.
As a similar approach is adopted by all subsequent surveys, I do not present
them in detail.

According to Joˇze Pogacˇnik, 10 Truber’s translation of TE 1555 was based
on Luther and the Vulgate, and veriﬁed against the Greek original by Verge-
rius.

The analysis of France Rozman 11 argues that Truber’s translation followed
Luther rather than the Greek original, displaying „considerable autonomy“
at  times.  The  parallel  passages  cited  and  analysed  mostly  stem  from  Mat-
thew’s Gospel, but also from elsewhere. Unfortunately, Rozman, too, failed
to consult Erasmus’ translation, or many passages might have been inter-
preted differently.

Joˇze Rajhman’s article on the translation methodology of Slovenian Pro-
testants 12 presents the then European view on translation, placing in its con-
text some of Truber’s statements on translating.

Expounding on the thoughts voiced by Truber in his introduction to TE
1555, Janko Moder 13 allows the possibility that Truber might have acquired
some Greek and Hebrew on his own, or given the ﬁnal form to passages in-
terpreted by his helpers and collaborators from the originals. He compares
Truber’s and Dalmatin’s translations of two biblical passages (Luke 7,41–47
and  Luke  16,11–17),  as  well  as  their  Greek  originals  and  Luther’s  trans-
lations,  noting  Truber’s  «independence»  of  Luther  in  rendering  certain

E.g. mosˇnja (TC 1550, TC 1555), sluˇzabnik (TC 1550, TC 1555), vodec (TC 1555), bogastvo
(bog) (TC 1550, TC 1555), milost (since TC 1550), etc.
France Kidricˇ, Zgodovina  slovenskega  slovstva  od  zacˇetkov  do  Zoisove  smrti,  Ljubljana
1929–1938, 69.
Joˇze Pogacˇnik, Zgodovina  slovenskega  slovstva  1:  Srednji  vek,  reformacija  in  protirefor-
macija, manirizem in barok, Maribor 1968, 149.

8

9

10

12

13

11 France Rozman, Kako je Trubar prevajal Sveto pismo Nove zaveze?, in: Bogoslovni vestnik

46/3 (1986), 227–245.
Joˇze Rajhman, Metodologija prevajanja slovenskih protestantov, in: Sˇtiristo let prevajanja na
Slovenskem, Ljubljana 1985 (Zbornik Drusˇtva slovenskih knjiˇzevnih prevajalcev 10), 27–32.
Janko Moder,  Ob  Trubarjevih  «treh  recˇeh»,  in: Sˇtiristo  let  prevajanja  na  Slovenskem,
Ljubljana 1985 (Zbornik Drusˇtva slovenskih knjiˇzevnih prevajalcev 10), 33–66.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

117

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

places. By his own admission, Moder did not consult Erasmus’ translation,
relying instead on the research conducted so far.

Kajetan  Gantar 14  addresses  the  translations  of  individual  words  in
Truber’s  and  Dalmatin’s  versions  of  Paul’s  speech  before  the  Areopagus.
While  he  ﬁnds  the  notion  of  Truber  and  Dalmatin  slavishly  clinging  to
Luther’s translation exaggerated, he does not attempt to identify their source
texts.

In her article on the problems of Truber’s style, Martina Oroˇzen 15 opines
that  calques  of  syntactic  patterns  occur  in  Truber’s  translations  more  fre-
quently than in Dalmatin’s, although both translated the Bible via Luther
(her authority for this is Rozman’s paper). What is important, she points out
that  the  questions  of  authentic  versus  calqued  syntactic  patterns  may  be
solved by comparing the syntactic encodings in Truber, Krelj, and Dalmatin
against parallel German and Latin texts. The above conclusion thus appears
premature, even in the light of her own words.

Klaus  Detlef  Olof 16  compares  Luther’s  and  Truber’s  understanding  of

translation activity.

Comparing Truber’s and Dalmatin’s translations of David’s Psalter in re-
lation to the Hebrew original, the Latin Vulgate, and Luther’s German ver-
sion, Francka Premk 17 believes that Truber’s translation of the Psalms takes
into account – directly or indirectly – the Hebrew text as well. Her book
«Korenine slovenskih psalmov» 18 portrays through an extensive, but metho-
dologically inconsistent analysis the relations obtaining between the Hebrew
original of the scriptural Psalter, some of its translations into Latin, German,
and Modern Slovenian, and Truber’s and Dalmatin’s translations. Her study
is entirely subordinated to proving that Truber, when translating the Psalms,
considered the original Hebrew text as well. While she does acknowledge
that Truber’s expansions of meaning often mirror Gwalther’s translation, her
presentation of these ﬁndings, too, is methodologically inadequate. As for

14 Kajetan Gantar, Konfrontacija med antiko in krsˇcˇanstvom: Nekaj opaˇzanj ob Trubarjevem in
Dalmatinovem prevodu Pavlovega govora na Areopagu, in: Sˇtiristo let prevajanja na Sloven-
skem, Ljubljana 1985 (Zbornik Drusˇtva slovenskih knjiˇzevnih prevajalcev 10), 83–87.

15 Martina Oroˇzen, Gramaticˇna in leksikalna preobrazba Dalmatinovega knjiˇznega jezika ob
Japljevem prevodu biblije (1584 – 1784 – 1802), in: Protestantismus bei den Slowenen – Prot-
estantizem  pri  Slovencih,  Wien  1984  (Wiener  slawistischer  Almanach,  Sonderband  13),
153–179.

16 Klaus Detlef  Olof,  Mittelalterliches  und  neuzeitliches  Sprachverständnis  am  Beispiel  der
Übersetzer Luther und Trubar, in: 16. stoletje v slovenskem jeziku, knjiˇzevnosti in kulturi,
Ljubljana 1986 (Obdobja 6), 517–527.

17 Francka Premk, Primerjava med Trubarjevim in Dalmatinovim prevodom Davidovega psal-
tra v razmerju do hebrejskega izvirnika, latinske Vulgate in nemsˇke Luthrove predloge, in: 16.
stoletje v slovenskem jeziku, knjiˇzevnosti in kulturi, Ljubljana 1986 (Obdobja 6), 529–543.

18 Francka Premk, Korenine slovenskih psalmov, Ljubljana 1992.

118

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

Musculus’ translation, no comparison is carried out at all despite references
to Musculus’ «commentaries» on the Psalter, these, however, are said to have
served Truber merely as «auxiliary suggestions» (alongside Gwalther’s text).
Nor does Premk engage in any comparative research to substantiate her the-
sis that Musculus’ detailed glosses on particular words merely clariﬁed for
Truber the original Hebrew text. Indeed, Musculus’ work appears to have
been included in her research only when the text of the study was already
completed.  Methodologically,  the  most  pressing  omission  is  the  failure  to
synthesise  Truber’s  general  method  in  translating  the  Psalms  (which  may
have, of course, undergone some changes in the eleven years of his engage-
ment with the Psalter).

Matej Rode 19 lists the terms by which the Slovenian Protestant writers
refer to ‹translating›, describing their subsequent development. Moreover, in
an article on translation in the Protestant period, 20 he cites and discusses the
Slovenian Protestants’ key statements on translating, lists the ten terms for
translation, and questions whether translating sacred texts, even the Bible, as
practised at the time was ‹translation› in the modern sense at all. This last re-
servation is rejected in the same volume by Majda Stanovnik 21 and Kajetan
Gantar. 22

A number of papers by Igor Grdina, later assembled in a book, 23 contain
important remarks on Truber’s knowledge of languages. Of particular im-
portance to understanding Truber’s translation work is the observation that,
in Truber’s view, the southwestern and southeastern varieties of spoken Ger-
man were not identical. 24

Majda  Stanovnik’s  articles  on  translation  during  the  Protestant  period
have been collected and supplemented in a monograph, «Slovenski literarni
prevod  1550–2000».  It  is  owing  to  the  well-conceived  chapter  «Trubarjev
prevod konstituira slovensko slovstvo» 25 («Truber’s Translation Constitutes

19 Matej Rode, Od preobracˇanja do prevajanja: Prispevek k preucˇevanju prevajalskega izrazja,
in: Sˇtiristo  let  prevajanja  na  Slovenskem,  Ljubljana  1985  (Zbornik  Drusˇtva  slovenskih
knjiˇzevnih prevajalcev 10), 103–105.

20 Matej Rode,  Slovenski  protestantizem  in  prevajanje,  in:  16.  stoletje  v  slovenskem  jeziku,

knjiˇzevnosti in kulturi, Ljubljana 1986 (Obdobja 6), 555–561.

21 Majda Stanovnik, Razprava o prevajanju, in: 16. stoletje v slovenskem jeziku, knjiˇzevnosti in

kulturi, Ljubljana 1986 (Obdobja 6), 563–564.

22 Kajetan Gantar, Nekaj misli o slovenskem protestantizmu in prevajanju, in: 16. stoletje v slo-

23

24

venskem jeziku, knjiˇzevnosti in kulturi, Ljubljana 1986 (Obdobja 6), 565–567.
Igor Grdina, Od Briˇzinskih spomenikov do razsvetljenstva, Maribor 1999, 121, 176–177, 195.
In fact, the difference between the colloquial German familiar to Truber and, on the other
hand, Luther’s literary language was considerable even by native speakers’ standards. Ac-
cording  to Grafenauer, O  Trubarjevem  prevodu  evangelijev,  298,  South  German  printers
would originally furnish their reprints of Luther’s Bible translation with glossaries, explain-
ing the words unfamiliar to the South Germans.

25 Majda Stanovnik, Slovenski literarni prevod 1550–2000, Ljubljana 2005, 13–42.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

119

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

the Slovenian Literature») that the present discussion does not comment at
length on Truber’s statements on translation (although they are quoted for
transparency’s  sake).  Stanovnik’s  chapter  compares  Truber’s  and  Luther’s
views on translation and their reasons and motives for translating, focusing
on such issues as the (im)possibility of translation, its legitimacy, cause and
aim, the relation between the original and translation, and between the trans-
lation and its reader. In addition, she addresses the questions of the trans-
lator’s  tasks  and  qualities.  Here  she  draws  a  demarcation  line  between
Truber’s views on translating the Bible, where strict adherence to the source
text is required, and translating an auxiliary, non-biblical text, which is ex-
panded and clariﬁed by the translator as it unfolds. Although this procedure
seems  to  blur  the  line  between  translation  and  interpretation,  Stanovnik
demonstrates that Truber did distinguish between the two. She believes that
Greek was not as inaccessible to him as he claimed, but that he was aware of
the clear-cut hierarchy of his language knowledge: it is enough to «under-
stand» the language of the original (for his own part, he claims to understand
Latin,  German,  and  Italian)  but  necessary  to  «know»  the  language  of  the
translation (as he knows Slovenian). Moreover, Truber was aware that the de-
mands of individual texts vary; his own translations are classiﬁed in Stanov-
nik’s analysis as «literary».

The chapter on the literariness of the Bible and of its translation 26 analyses
and compares several translations of two biblical passages for their literary
quality (Matthew 14,1–12 and Matthew 25,1–13): the original text of the ﬁrst
passage  is  thus  compared  to  the  Vulgate,  Erasmus,  Luther,  Truber  (1555),
Dalmatin (1584), and Kastelec (1680), while the analysis of the second is ex-
tended to still additional parallels – Anonymous after Stapleton (ca. 1600),
Hren-Cˇ andek (1613), and Schönleben (1672). Having limited her analysis to
the translation of Matthew’s Gospel, and further narrowed it down to the
«literary»  aspect  rather  than  the  source  vs.  translation  relation,  Stanovnik
still claims in her introduction that Truber relied primarily on the Vulgate
and the German Bible, and partly on Erasmus’ expositions, although most of
the examples analysed actually reveal the inﬂuence of Erasmus’ New Testa-
ment translation.

Majda Mersˇe has analysed in detail several individual characteristics of
translations, particularly of those with German source texts. Thus she com-
pares the translation solutions involving the types of verbal action as used by
16th century Slovenian Protestant writers in the light of their German sources
(Luther, Spangenberg), 27 aspect and tense in Truber’s and Dalmatin’s Bible

Stanovnik, Slovenski literarni prevod 1550–2000, 129–166.

26
27 Majda Mersˇe, Vrste glagolskega dejanja v delih slovenskih protestantskih piscev 16. stoletja in

tuje prevodne predloge, in: Slavisticˇna revija 46/1–2 (1998), 55–71.

120

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

translations, 28 and the lexical characteristics of the Postils – again, in further
comparison with the source texts. 29

Finally, the topic recurs in a number of works which merely repeat or

quote the above conclusions.

2. Primus Truber’s Own Account of His Sources for Bible Translations

Primus  Truber  repeatedly  describes  his  approach  to  translating  scriptural
texts. True, his references to his sources are partly aimed at underlining the
theological appropriateness and correctness of his translation, but his state-
ments nevertheless provide us with an appropriate framework for further
discussion, and are therefore worth quoting.
– For TE 1555, he (or rather, both he and Petrus Paulus Vergerius, as indi-
cated by the plural) allegedly used the Greek original, complementing it
with  translations  from  the  Greek  into  Latin,  German,  and  Italian,  but
chieﬂy  with  Erasmus’  translation  of  the  New  Testament;  of  great  help
were also Erasmus’ «Annotationes». 30

– In  the  report  sent  to  Duke  Christoph  of  Württemberg  on  9  February
1555, Vergerius records his attempts to persuade Truber to translate the
New Testament into Slovenian: Truber would follow Luther’s translation,
and then other translations would be consulted for comparison as well. 31
– Truber, in a letter to Heinrich Bullinger dated 13 September 1555, claims

to know neither Greek nor Hebrew. 32

– In the same letter to Bullinger (13 Sept 1555), he tells of Vergerius’ at-

28 Majda Mersˇe, Vid in cˇas v Trubarjevih in Dalmatinovih biblijskih prevodih, in: 36. seminar

slovenskega jezika, literature in kulture, Ljubljana 2000, 21–34.

31

30

29 Majda Mersˇe, Prepoznavnost in znacˇilnosti besedja slovenskih protestantskih postil 16. sto-
letja, Slavisticˇna revija 55/1–2 (2007), 65–84.
«Mi uletim nashim preurazhenu ɾmo ueden imeili pred ɾebo, ta praui ɾtudeniz tiga Nouiga
Teɾtamenta, kir ie Gershki piɾɾan, rauen tiga ɾmo mi tudi gledali na tu preurazhene tih nouih
inu ɾtarih vuzhenikou, kateri ɾo ta nou Teɾtament is tiga Gerskiga Ieɾika vta Latinski, Nem-
shki inu vlashki preobernili, Ner vezh pag na Eraɾmou Roterdamou nou Teɾtament, htimu ɾo
nom nega annotationes ɾylnu pomagale.»
«[. . .] monebam illum ipsum ministrum [sc. Truberum], quo pacto procedere deberet in ne-
gotio versionis in linguam Sclavicam, ut scilicet Martini Lutheri versionem sequeretur, donec
conferremus cum aliis versionibus [.. .]» (Grafenauer, O Trubarjevem prevodu evangelijev,
298).
«Der herr Vergerius [.. .], der hat dits jar mit mir vill gehandelt, damit mich vnterstuende aus
latein vnd teutsch das neu testament in die windisch sprach zuuerdolmetschen, welches jme,
nachdem  mich  vntüglich,  dieweil  griechisch  noch  hebraisch  nicht  kann,  erkhen,  abge-
schlagen, bis mir von der ganzen khirchen meines vatterlands ist aufgeregt» (Joˇze Rajhman,
Pisma Primoˇza Trubarja, Ljubljana 1986, 24).

32

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

121

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

tempts to persuade him to translate the New Testament into Slovenian via
Latin and German. 33

– In TT 1557 he says (when explaining how time-consuming the work is!)
that he keeps on his desk two Latin, two German, and one Italian New
Testament translation, as well as a Croatian missal and Erasmus’ «Anno-
tationes» and other commentaries. 34

– In TT 1557 he claims not to know an iota of Hebrew, nor to read Greek 35

very well. 36

– In a letter to Bullinger dated 13 March 1557, he expresses his approval of
an Italian Bible translation received from Zürich (most likely Brucioli’s
translation; cf. Grafenauer 298). 37

– In a letter to Hans Ungnad dated 4 November 1561, he suggests that Ste-
phan Consul should translate as he has done himself: after Luther and
others. 38

– In a letter to Bullinger dated 1 February 1559, he reports that the works of
Gwalther and Musculus have proved most helpful in his translation of the
Psalter into Slovenian, 39 adding that he has already translated and anno-
tated 33 Psalms.

– In  his  1562  preface  to  the  Glagolitic  ﬁrst  part  of  the  New  Testament,
Truber reports that the Croatian New Testament translation has required

33

34

36

37

38

39

See previous footnote.
«Vnd  nachdem  mein  dolmetschen  gehet  langsam  von  stat  /  von  wegen  meines  schwären
Predigamptes / dem ich zu fordest außwarten muß / Vnd das ich im dolmetschen alweg zwey
Lateinisch / zwey Teutsch / vnd ein Wälsch new Testament / Jtem / ein Crobatisch Meßbuch
/ wölches newlich zu Venedig mit Latinischen Buchstaben gedruckt worden / vor mir muß
haben / vnd ehe ich ein jedlichs wort / insorderheit einer jeder Translation / auch die Anno-
tationes Erasmi / vnd andere Commentaria darüber besihe vnd erwege / wölcher Translation
ich volgen soll / mit dem gehet vil zeit hin» (TT 1557: b 4b).

35 For a good explanation of the two passages on his unfamiliarity with Greek, see Grdina, Od

Briˇzinskih spomenikov do razsvetljenstva, 188–189.
«Ich kenne kein Hebreischen buchstaben / Griechisch kan nicht wol lesen / wölche zwo
Sprachen einem jeden / der die Bibel verdolmetschen wil / zu forderst von nötten seind / das
er sie wol vnd grundtlich verstehe. Vnd wiewol (Gott lob) die Bibel / vnd sonderlich bey
disen vnseren zeiten / von jren etlichen / auß dem Hebreischen vnd Griechischen / in die La-
teinische / Teutsche vnd Wälsche sprach / gut vnd verstendig ist verdolmetscht / wie alle Ge-
lerten dauon zeugen» (TT 1557: a 4a–a 4b).
«Porro rogo tuam pietatem, vt me ﬁdeliter commendes tuis symmistis, collegis et fratribus,
precipue tum domino Bernhardo de Senis et dicas ei, quod illa translatio Jtalica, que nuper a
quodam Jtalo Geneue facta, mihi apprime placet et me multum iuuat in versione Schlauica»
(Rajhman, Pisma Primoˇza Trubarja, 27).
«Sprach jch, er soll dollmetschen, wie jchs dem Luthero vnnd anndern nach recht verdoll-
metscht hab» (Rajhman, Pisma Primoˇza Trubarja, 97).
«Gruest die herren ewr chorbrueder, furnemblich den herrn Gualtherum jn meinen namen;
sein arbeit vnd des Musculi jn psalterium dient mir gantz wol zu meinem windischen psalter.
Jch hab schon 33 psalm vertirt, hab auch die argumenta vor vnd annotationes jn margine vnd
expositiones in ﬁne wie der herr Walther gesetzt» (Rajhman, Pisma Primoˇza Trubarja, 36).

122

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

more than one Latin, German, and Italian – and, because of certain words,
even Czech – Bible translation, but that the translators are chieﬂy follow-
ing the versions by Erasmus and Luther. 40

– In his preface to TPs 1566, Truber states that he has translated the Psalms
in eleven years, mainly on the basis of Latin translations but also of Ger-
man  ones.  The  statement  is  probably  intended  to  forestall  those  who
might reproach him for not following Luther’s version. 41 Such reproaches
indeed arose, as is evident from a letter written by Matthias Klombner to
Gallus:  Klombner  taxes  Truber  with  having  translated  the  Psalter  via
Zwingli rather than Luther, 42 which is not supported by our analysis.

3. An Analysis of the Sources for Truber’s Bible Translations

and of His Basic Translation Procedures

For a well-grounded discussion of Musculus’ and Gwalther’s inﬂuence on
Truber’s translation of the Psalter – the only Old Testament text translated by
Truber – we should ﬁrst examine Truber’s approach to the New Testament
books, which form the bulk of his translation oeuvre, since his translation of
the Psalter would not have departed signiﬁcantly from his established pro-
cedures. To this end we have analysed ﬁve passages from various New Tes-
tament books, followed by ﬁve Psalms from various parts of the Psalter. To
facilitate comparison, we have further analysed the relevant translations by
Georg Dalmatin, the ﬁrst translator of the complete Bible into Slovenian,
who – as established beyond doubt – followed Martin Luther’s version. 43

40

41

«Vnnd auff das E. Kün. May. vnnd andere / auch ein wissen haben / auß wölchen Büchern /
vnnd was für ein sachen wir verdolmetschen / vnd ob wir mit vnserm Dolmetschen / Trucken /
Geschrifften vnnd Buchstaben / vngedadelt / vnuerspott pleiben / vnd vor Gelerten der hei-
ligen Schrifft / vnd der Crobatischen Sprache Erfarnen / bestehn werden oder nicht: So will ich
hiemit / dauon auch ein kurtzen bericht thun. Wie wir haben vnnd gebrauchen gleichwol /
mehr dann ein / Lateinische / Teutsche / vnnd Wällische (vnnd / von wegen ettlicher alten /
Windischen Wörter / ein Behömische) Dolmetschungen der Bibel / Aber wir halten vns / vnnd
volgen am Maisten / des Eraßmi vnnd Lutheri Translation. Vnd seind des vorhabens / wenn
wir das new Testament haben vollendet / als dann so wöllen wir durch Brieff vnnd zuschreiben
/ bey den Hochgelerten Theologen der Hebreyschen sprach vnd Geschrifften erfarnen / vnd
Vniversiteten Rath suchen / wölcher Dollmetschung / es sey im Latein / Teutsch oder Wällisch
/ wir doch fürnämlich vnnd am maisten volgen sollen» (Oskar Sakrausky, Primus Truber:
Deutsche Vorreden zum slowenischen und kroatischen Reformationswerk, Wien/Ljubljana
1989 [Studien und Texte zur Kirchengeschichte und Geschichte 5/1], 218).
«Ieɾt ɾem  lete  Buque  ainaiɾt  leit  po  zhaɾu  inu  resmishlaie  tomazhil,  Inu ɾdai  Shtyri  Meɾce
poredu drukal. Aku ɾe sledna beɾɾeda ɾteim Nemshkim Tolmazhenem neɾgliha, Satu ɾe ne
ɾmotite, Ieɾt ɾem vezh is Latinskih koker Nemshkih Tolmazherieu tomazhil.»
«Fragt, warum er den psalter nach dem Zwingl vertirt vnd nit Luthern gevolgt hat» (Mirko
Rupel, Povabilo in odpoved Gasˇperju Melissandru, in: Slavisticˇna revija 8/3–4 (1955), 220).
43 The passages analysed include Matthew 26,17–25, Luke 1,26–38, Romans 3,21–31, 1 Corin-

42

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

123

3.1 Truber’s Translation of New Testament Texts

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

We have compared the translations of the selected passages to all accessible
works which might have been followed by Truber and Dalmatin:
1. Luther’s German translation of the complete Bible, after the 1545 edition

(LB)

(EB)

2. Erasmus’ Latin translation of the New Testament, after the 1542 edition

3. The Latin Vulgate (Vu)
4. The «Zwingli» Bible in German, after the 1531 edition (ZB)
5. Brucioli’s Italian translation of the New Testament (BB)
6. Bernardin’s lectionary (Be 1885)
7. The original Greek text of the New Testament (GB)
As revealed by our analysis, Truber based his New Testament translation on
Erasmus’  version,  occasionally  revising  it  with  Luther’s.  Dalmatin,  by
contrast, strictly followed Luther, adhering to Truber’s text wherever it did
not depart from Luther’s.

Before examining the relations between Truber’s translation on the one
hand and Erasmus’ and Luther’s on the other, we must, however, ﬁrst outline
and explain the role of the other examined translations as it emerges from the
analysed passages.

3.1.1 The Vulgate
The differences between Erasmus’ translation and the Vulgate, although nu-
merous, are for the most part such as to be easily obliterated in translation.
Nevertheless, there have remained enough evident discrepancies for a well-
nigh  unanimous  agreement  between  researchers  that  Truber  followed
Luther, rather than the Vulgate, «with certain departures».

An examination of those departures reveals that, wherever the difference
between the Vulgate and Erasmus is capable of being reﬂected in the Slove-
nian translation, the source followed by Truber is Erasmus. Listed below are
the most conspicuous examples where Truber follows Erasmus while depart-
ing from both the Vulgate and Luther.

thians 2,1–5, 2 Thessalonians 2,1–4, and Psalms 1, 2,1–5, 30, 147, 150, in all of Truber’s and
Dalmatin’s translations (the works are listed in the Bibliography section). Dalmatin’s texts are
taken from DB 1584, with due attention to potential major variations in the earlier editions.
Truber’s texts are taken from TE 1555 (Matthew 26,17–25), TT 1557 (Luke 1,26–38), TT 1560
(Romans 3,21–31), TL 1561 (1 Corinthians 2,1–5), TL 1567 (2 Thessalonians 2,1–4), and the
Psalms from Ps 1566. We have also checked TT 1581–82 for variations, drawing attention to
them if necessary.

124

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

Passage
Luke 1,28
Romans 3,22

Romans 3,24
Romans 3,26
Mark 16,2

1 Corinthians 2,1

Truber
periatliua
htim vɾem, inu zhes
vɾe te, kir Veruio
ampag
vletim
viutro sgudo tiga pe-
ruiga dne tih Sobot
pryzhouane Boshye

Erasmus
gratiosa
in omnes et super om-
nes eos qui credunt
autem
in hoc
summo diluculo diei
primi sabbatorum
testimonium Dei

Vulgate
gratia plena
super omnes qui credunt

/
/
valde mane una sabbatorum

testimonium Christi

These major differences between Erasmus and the Vulgate could be iden-
tiﬁed even on the presupposition that Truber translated the other passages
via  Luther.  As  it  transpires,  however,  that  Truber  followed  Erasmus,  the
number of such passages is naturally much higher.

What,  then,  was  the  role  of  the  Vulgate  in  Truber’s  translating?  While
Truber did not adopt it as a constant source text, he may well have followed it
in places. The passages analysed yield a single example of this kind:

Passage
1 Corinthians 2,3

Truber
vti shibkoti

Erasmus
per inﬁrmitatem

Vulgate
in inﬁrmitate

Luther translates the phrase as «mit schwacheit». Truber, while not at vari-
ance with Erasmus, adopts the same solution as the Vulgate.

3.1.2 The «Zwingli» German Bible (ZB)

The observation concerning the Vulgate may be extended to all texts under
comparison. With respect to the differences that could affect translation, the
ZB text is identical to the LB text. In the few places displaying perceptible
differences,  Truber  follows  Luther.  While  ZB  thus  certainly  never  served
Truber  as  a  source  text,  it  was  an  occasional  aid  in  translating  individual
words. In the passages under discussion, Truber may have followed ZB in the
following cases:

Passage
Matthew 26,24

Matthew 26,25
1 Corinthians 2,4

Truber
Ta syn tiga zhloueka
gre kiakai
Moiɾter
vlepih vkunshtnih
beɾɾedah

Zwingli
Deß Menschen sun
gadt dahin

meyster
in hüpschen worten

Luther / Erasmus
Des menschen Son gehet
zwar da hin / Filius quidem
hominis vadit
rabbi / Rabbi
in vernüfftigen Reden / in
persuasoriis

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

125

Passage
2 Thessalonians 2,4

Truber
vɾe tu, kir ɾe praui
Bug, oli kar ɾe moli

Zwingli
alles das Gott genennet
oder geeret wirt

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

Luther / Erasmus
alles das Gott oder Gottes-
dienst heisset / omnem, qui
dicitur Deus aut numen

In the ﬁrst example, ZB may have inﬂuenced the omission of the particle.
Similarly, the translation of the term rabbi (which is used by Truber as well,
but as a translation of Erasmus’ magister) as mojster is most plausibly at-
tributed to ZB. Rendering the term numen/Gottesdienst as vɾe tu, kar ɾe moli
– that is, alles das geeret wirt – likewise suggests Zwingli’s model. The most
interesting  case,  however,  is  the  rendering  of  the  Latin  word persuasoria,
translated  by  Luther  in  the  sense  of kunsˇtne/razumne  besede  [«prudent
speech»] and by Zwingli as lepe besede [«pretty words»], while the meaning
of the Latin term lies somewhere in between. Here, Truber may have com-
bined Luther’s and Zwingli’s interpretations.

3.1.3 Brucioli, Bernardin’s Lectionary, and the Greek New Testament
No  noticeable  parallels  have  been  discovered  with  Brucioli’s  text  (1552),
Bernardin’s  lectionary  (Be  1885),  or  the  Greek  New  Testament  text, 44  es-
pecially Matthew’s Gospel, for which the Greek text is listed as one of the
sources.

As  BB  1552  follows  Erasmus’  translation  quite  faithfully,  Truber  may
have used it as a kind of Latin-Italian dictionary and a syntactically simpli-
ﬁed version of his source, Erasmus. Wherever Brucioli and Erasmus disagree
(on average once or twice per page), Truber regularly follows Erasmus. In the
rare  cases  where  he  does  give  precedence  to  Brucioli’s  version,  a  solution
identical to Brucioli’s is invariably found in Luther (who is the more likely
source). 45

The  texts  from  Bernardin’s  lectionary  diverge  from  Truber’s  solutions
(also) with respect to the lexicon, which suggests that Truber consulted them
rarely,  if  at  all.  The  passages  Luke  1,26–38,  Matthew  21,1–9,  and  Mark
16, 1–8 have revealed no parallels. Even if Truber actually did consult Ber-
nardin’s lectionary, it has left no discernible traces in the Slovenian texts. A
more accurate assessment of its role would thus require nothing short of an
overall comparison between Bernardin’s and Truber’s lexicons, but it is ques-

veze?, 227–240.

44 This is additionally supported by Rozman, Kako je Trubar prevajal Sveto pismo Nove za-
45 E.g. Romans 3,25: TT: skuɾi to Vero vnega kry; LB: durch den glauben in seinem Blut; BB: per
la fede nel sangue di esso; or 2 Thessalonians 2,4: TL: koker Bug; LB: als ein Gott; BB: come
Iddio.

126

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

tionable whether this time-consuming comparison would yield any tangible
results.

3.1.4 Truber vs. Erasmus

Although Truber wrote as early as TE 1555 that he had chieﬂy relied on Eras-
mus’ New Testament translation, the scholarship to date has – as demon-
strated above – considered as his basic source Luther’s translation, while the
role  of  an  important  aid  was  attributed,  above  all,  to  Erasmus’  «Annota-
tiones». The analysis of selected passages, however, has identiﬁed as Truber’s
basic  source  Erasmus’  Latin  translation  of  the  New  Testament. 46  This,  of
course, is not to say that Truber did not follow Luther as well: rather, he pri-
marily followed Erasmus, and Luther only occasionally. The tendency is best
illustrated by a comparison of Truber’s and Dalmatin’s translations of Luke
1, 26–38 with those by Erasmus and Luther.

Truber in this passage consistently follows Erasmus, while Dalmatin fol-

lows Luther. Below are some examples:

Erasmus
autem
Galilaeae
cui
nacta es enim gratiam

Truber
potle
Galileisku
timu
ɾakai ti ɾi neshla
miloɾt
nega Ozheta
jeɾt mosha ne snam virum non cognosco

patris eius

Luther
vnd
in Galilea
mit namen
du hast gnade ...
funden
seines vaters
von keinem Manne
weis
vnd gehet itzt im
sechsten mond

Dalmatin
inu
v’Galilei
s’imenom
ti ɾi ... gnado naɾhla

njegoviga Ozheta
od obeniga Mosha nevem
inu gre sdaj v’ɾheɾti Meɾsez
kakor ɾi ti govuril
dela
od vaɾhe miɾli

inu ni ... ie leta
shesti meɾɾiz
po tui beɾɾedi
bode ... prauizhno
ɾturil
od te miɾli

et hic mensis est sexus illi

secundum verbum tuum wie du gesagt hast
iustiﬁcabit

machet

a mente

von ewrem sinn

46

It may not be amiss to point out here an article by Sˇtefan Barbaricˇ, or Primoˇz Simoniti’s con-
clusion to his monograph on humanism in the Slovenian countries. On the pages given below,
they suggest that it would be worthwhile to re-examine Erasmus’ inﬂuence on Truber’s work,
both original and translated: Sˇtefan Barbaricˇ, Stik Primoˇza Trubarja z mislijo Erazma Rot-
terdamskega, in: Zbornik za slavistiku 3, Novi Sad 1972, 87–98; Primoˇz Simoniti, Humani-
zem na Slovenskem in slovenski humanisti do srede XVI. stoletja, Ljubljana 1979, 233–234.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

127

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

Passages of great theological signiﬁcance are less suitable for identifying the
source text, 47 but even here Truber often surprises us with his «Erasmian»
solutions. A case in point is a passage from the Epistle to the Romans (Ro-
mans 3,28), on which Luther discourses at length in his open letter on trans-
lation. 48 The issue at stake is the word allein, which Luther adds to the origi-
nal  «in  the  spirit  of  the  German  language»,  producing  the  following
translation: «So halten wir es nu / Das der Mensch gerecht werde / on des
Gesetzes werck / alleine durch den Glauben.» Erasmus, of course, has no
equivalent of only: «Arbitramur igitur ﬁde iustiﬁcari hominem absque operi-
bus legis.» In this, Truber follows Erasmus in both editions, TT 1560 and TT
1581–82, although he revised for TT 1581–82 the text of this very passage,
merely two lines further down, in accordance with Luther’s. Truber’s trans-
lation runs: «Satu mi terdno dershimo, De ta zhlouik bode Prauizhin ɾturien
skuɾi to Vero, pres tih del te Poɾtaue.» Dalmatin, by contrast, follows Luther,
although  his  translation  is  clearly  based  on  Truber’s:  «satu  my  térdnu
dèrshimo, de Zhlovik pravizhen poɾtane, pres del te Poɾtave, le ɾkusi vero.»
We  ﬁnd  it  highly  signiﬁcant  that  Truber  purposely  chose  not  to  follow
Luther in such a key passage. 49

3.1.5 Truber vs. Luther
For all that, the role of Luther’s text in Truber’s translations (as evident from
Section 4) is far from negligible. Sometimes Truber complements Erasmus’
text with Luther’s «additions» (e.g. Romans 2,22: «Ieɾt pag gouorim od lete»
vs. «Jch sage aber von solcher»), although not regularly (e.g. Romans 3,25:
Truber does not insert the addition «die fur jm gilt»). Certain phrases – es-
pecially  those  demanding  a  (longer)  descriptive  paraphrase  in  Slovenian  –
and words are often closely modelled on Luther. Listed below are some typi-
cal examples from the analysed texts:

Passage
Romans 3.25

Truber
pod teim Boshym po-
terplenem

Luther
vnter göttlicher gedult

Erasmus
quae Deus toleravit

47 For such passages, the translator will naturally collate several texts and commentaries.
48 Truber’s acquaintance with this work is suggested by a passage from TC (1575: 191–192) and,

as noted by Rajhman, by the preface to TE 1555 (Rajhman, Metodologija prevajanja, 29).

49 Luther, it is true, justiﬁes his translation by appealing to the nature of the German language as
opposed to Latin: «Ob’s gleich die lateinische oder griechische Sprache in diesen Redeweisen
allen nicht tut, so tut’s doch die deutsche und ist’s ihre Art, daß sie das Wort ‹allein› hinzu-
setzt, auf daß das Wort ‹nicht› oder ‹kein› um so völliger und deutlicher sei [.. .], denn man
muss nicht die Buchstaben in der lateinischen Sprache fragen, wie man soll Deutsch reden,
wie diese Esel tun» (Martin Luther, Sendbrief vom Dolmetschen, 1530). However, the nature
of the Slovenian language might have «required» le (only) just as well if Truber had so wanted.

128

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

Passage
Matthew 26.17
Matthew 26.18
Matthew 26.24
Matthew 21.9

Mark 16.5

Mark 16.6

Truber
Velikunozhnu Iagne
puɾti tebi poueidati
Bulshe bi nemu billu
kir ɾo naprei shli inu
ɾad hodili
ɾanem dolgim belim
guantom
Ieɾuɾa Nazarenuɾa tiga
Cryshaniga

Luther
Osterlamb
lesst dir sagen
Es were jm besser
das vorgieng vnd nach-
folget
ein lang weis Kleid

Erasmus
pascha
dicit
bonum erat ei
quae praecedebant, et
quae sequabantur
stola candida

Jhesum von Nazareth
den gecreutzigten

Iesum Nazarenum, qui
fuit cruciﬁxus

3.1.6 Truber – Independently
Finally, two of Truber’s translation solutions in the passages discussed defy
direct identiﬁcation with any parallel source. These appear to be his original
solutions,  formed  in  the  spirit  of  the  Slovenian  language  or  under  the  in-
ﬂuence of biblical commentaries. Both are cited below:

Passage
Romans 3,23

Mark 16,1

Truber
eden mumu drugiga
ne vela
shlahtne diɾezhe ko-
rene inu shalbe

Erasmus
non ... est distinctio

Luther
es ist ... kein vnterschied

aromata

specerey

3.2 Psalms

Having outlined Truber’s basic approach to translating New Testament texts,
we  may  now  address  more  competently  his  approach  to  Old  Testament
Psalms – the only Old Testament text at which he ever tried his hand. We
have compared Truber’s version of the Psalms with the following works:
1. Musculus’  1556  Latin  translation  of  the  Psalter,  extensively  annotated

(MPs)

2. Gwalther’s translation of the Psalter in the 1831 edition 50 (WPs)
3. Luther’s 1545 German translation of the complete Bible (LB)
4. the Latin Vulgate (iuxta LXX and iuxta Hebraeos) (Vu)
5. the German «Zwingli» Bible, after the 1531 edition (ZB)

50 The text of this edition is conﬁrmed by Premk, Korenine, 702 to be a transcript of the original

1558 edition, which we have been, for all our efforts, unable to access.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

129

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

6. the Hebrew Bible with a comprehensive lexical analysis, explanation of

the Hebrew words, and Greek and English translations

7. the Greek text of the Old Testament (the Septuagint)

The Psalter, being Truber’s only Old Testament translation, was the only one
where he could not resort to Erasmus. The Psalms analysed and compared in
our study suggest that his translation procedures were basically the same as
with the New Testament books. As his basic source texts he adopted Muscu-
lus’ Latin translation of the Psalter, extensively annotated, and Gwalther’s
German translation, occasionally consulting Luther’s version as well. No pas-
sage, however, points to a direct translation from the original Hebrew text.

3.2.1 Musculus
Musculus’  abundantly  annotated  translation  of  the  Psalms  from  Hebrew
into Latin (MPs 1556) represents, by the standards of the time, a more than
exemplary work. Each Psalm is cited and annotated in the framework of the
following sections:

1. argumentum psalmi (the content of the Psalm):

– usus huius psalmi (its use and purpose)
– dispositio psalmi (its structure)

2. the text in the Latin translation (given by lines, by sections, or as a whole)
3. lectio (a text-critical commentary on the text cited)
4. occasionally: divisio (the division of the Psalm)
5. explanatio (an explanation of individual lines, sections, or the whole)
6. observatio (additional theological and content-related observations on the

meaning of individual lines, sections, or the whole)

Where necessary, the title of the Psalm (titulus) is explained at the beginning
as well.

This work provided Truber with an excellent overview of most of the ex-
tant translations, as well as of the original. All passages where the translations
signiﬁcantly diverge from each other are furnished in Musculus’ lectio sec-
tion with an extensive apparatus, which includes both the original Hebrew
text (Ebraeus) and a number of translations:

– Ancient Greek (the Septuagint or Graecus), 51
– both Ancient Latin translations: iuxta LXX (Vulgata Latina) and iuxta

Hebraeos (Hieronimus),

51

In all probability he used the printed edition of the Septuagint published by Aldus Manutius
in Venice, 1518.

130

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

– the  label  «Chaldean  translation» (Chaldaeus)  presumably  refers  to  the
Aramaic Targum of Psalms; it is almost certainly taken from Justinianus’
1516 Psalter edition, which includes a column headed Periphrasis chaldea,
– an Arabic translation (Arabs), almost certainly based on the Arabic text as

found in Justinianus (Ju 1516),

– the following New Latin translations:

– an interlinear Old Testament translation brought closer to the Hebrew
(Latin – Hebrew), prepared at the beginning of the 16th century by
Santes Pagninus (Pagninus),

– a translation of the Psalms from the Hebrew, furnished in Venice, 1515,

– Justinianus’ multilingual Psalter edition, published in 1516 in Paris and

by Felix Pratensis (Felix),

Geneva (Iustinianus),

– a work titled «Psalmorum omnium paraphrastica interpretatio», pub-

lished in 1536 by Joannes Campensis at Roskild (Campensis),

– a Psalter published by Martin Bucer in 1539 under the pseudonym of

Aretius Felinus (Felinus),

– a Latin translation of the Old Testament, «Biblia Tigurina» (the Psalms
were translated by Leo Juda and Theodore Bibliander), published in
1543 in Zürich (Tigurina).

Since, moreover, Musculus’ explanatio section discourses on particular char-
acteristics of the Hebrew words, Truber was occasionally able to approach
the Hebrew text even without understanding it. Musculus addresses in detail
certain language-speciﬁc characteristics, such as the use of tenses in various
languages, as well as the theological meanings of some polysemantic terms.

3.2.2 Truber’s Approach to Psalm Translation

In translating the Psalter, Truber adopted essentially the same approach as in
the case of the New Testament books. It can be proved that he combined – as
he claims himself – the translations by Musculus, Gwalther, and Luther. An
analysis  of  texts  taken  from  the  beginning,  middle  and  end  of  the  Psalter
(Psalms 1, 2,1–5, 30, 147, and 150) yields the following ﬁgures:

Psalm

Psalm 1
Psalm 2.1–5
Psalm 30

Following
Musculus
alone

Following
Gwalther
alone

Following
Luther alone

9
2
8

1
0
7

0
3
2

Following
Musculus or
Luther
3
0
2

Following
Gwalther or
Luther
1
0
6

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Total

14
5
25

131

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

Psalm

Psalm 147
Psalm 150
Total

Following
Musculus
alone

Following
Gwalther
alone

Following
Luther alone

8
0
27

6
1
15

5
1
11

Following
Musculus or
Luther
4
0
9

Following
Gwalther or
Luther
10
3
20

Total

33
5
82

Of the 82 passages where the translations examined diverge, Musculus may
be credited with 32 to 43 per cent of the solutions, Gwalther with 18 to 42,
and Luther with 13 to 48 (there are a number of passages where Luther and
Gwalther  agree  with  each  other).  Parallel  readings  of  most  other  Psalms
(3–29,  90–100,  120–146,  148–149)  yield  a  similar  picture,  while  passages
clearly suggesting a fourth source, such as the Hebrew text, have not been
found.

Two-word translations, such as cˇastiti in hvaliti (worship and praise) for
celebro, hvalo peti/hvaleˇzno peti (to sing praise/sing gratefully) for psallo, or
veselje in volja (joy and will) for voluntas, are, as a rule, motivated by Mus-
culus’ commentary. 52 Let us examine the last example. Truber uses the ex-
pressions veɾɾelie inu vola, «joy and will» (Psalm 1,2) to render the Hebrew
[wjp
 which is translated by Gwalther and Luther as lust, and by the Latin
versions as voluntas. The scholarship to date has failed to solve the question
why Truber should have employed two words in his translation. The answer,
however, emerges readily enough after a consultation of Musculus’ commen-
tary (MPs 1556: 4), which states: «But the Hebrew term is broader than the
translation voluntas (will), for the meaning of the former term involves a cer-
tain joy (delectatio) and delight (voluptas) or good mood (iucunditas).» This
meaning, then, was added by Truber to the direct translation of the Latin
word. 53

In  addition  to  the  examples  charted  above,  there  remain  ﬁve  passages
where Truber diverges from all three, Musculus, Gwalther, and Luther. 54 In-
terestingly, none of them is directly motivated by Hebrew. 55 The facts out-

52 By contrast, a translation of this type is explained in Premk, Korenine, 63, as follows: «The

ampliﬁcation with the lexical addition inu vola is a result of Truber’s own creativity.»

53 A two-word translation, but a different one, is found in ZB as well: lust und fröud.
54 This group represents 5.8 per cent of the total of 86 passages where the translations diverge.
 (Psalm 2,2) not as «his
55 Three of the passages are modelled on Jerome (Trubar translates

anointed one», which would match his major sources, but as Criɾtuɾ, a solution only found in

wxyXm 

Jerome’s translation – Christum); Psalm 147,4 (Truber adds the phrase shnih; Vu has nomine
suo); and Psalm 147,11 (Truber adds the conjunction inu in imitation of et). One passage
matches ZB (Psalm 30,11: the word mene is added for the sake of transparency), while one
probably represents Truber’s original reshaping of the text (Psalm 147,5: the translation is not
literal: ɾe ne more preshteti «cannot be counted» instead of nima sˇtevila «has no number»).

132

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

lined above should, of course, not mislead us into believing that Truber was
unaware of the meanings of the Hebrew text – even if he (had) lacked all
knowledge of Hebrew, he had commentaries at his disposal. What we con-
tend is merely that he did not translate directly from the Hebrew.

Primus Truber’s approach to translating biblical texts, as well as his choice
of  the  source  texts,  suggest  that  he  preferred  to  rely  on  the  authoritative
translations of his time, rather than interpret the original texts on his own or
translate from the original languages. This is not to say, of course, that he was
not interested in approaching the original texts – mastered by translators in
varying degrees – or that he did not keep them at hand during the translation
process  (another  question  is  how  much  Greek  and  Hebrew  he  actually
knew). Above all he sought to avoid the risk that his interpretation might be
inappropriate, infelicitous or even wrong. 56 In this light, Truber’s approach
to  the  New  Testament  texts  is  –  from  a  theological  perspective  as  well  –
highly  interesting  for  his  simultaneous  reliance  on  Erasmus  and  Luther,
while his approach to the Old Testament Psalms is especially fascinating for
his use of Musculus and Gwalther alongside Luther. Musculus’ inﬂuence in
particular was very strong (partly due to the added commentaries), so that
future evaluations of Musculus’ work should not overlook his contribution
to the ﬁnal form of the Slovenian Psalms.

4. Summary

The paper examines the procedures of translating scriptural texts employed
by  the  Slovenian  Protestant  writer  Primus  Truber  (Primoˇz  Trubar)
(1508–1586). Truber translated into Slovenian the entire New Testament, as
well as the Old Testament Psalms. For a clearer view of Truber’s procedures
in translating the Psalms, the paper begins by citing his own statements on
translating the New Testament texts, and continues by analysing these pro-
cedures in detail through the ﬁrst half of the discussion. What transpires is
that Truber translated the New Testament texts by combining two models:
the Latin translation of the New Testament by Desiderius Erasmus and the
German  translation  by  Martin  Luther.  The  paper  continues  by  citing
Truber’s statements on translating the Psalms, summarising a comparative
analysis of his potential models (Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, the Vulgate,
the  «Zwingli»  Bible  based  on  the  edition  of  1531,  the  Hebrew  Bible,  the
Greek translation of the Old Testament – the Septuagint). In translating the
Psalms, Truber appears to have pursued essentially the same method as with
the New Testament: he combined three models, Musculus, Gwalther, and

56

In Truber’s day, a translator’s mistake was prone to be regarded as heresy.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

133

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

Luther, sometimes drawing on Musculus’ notes as well, which is highlighted
in the discussion (with an accompanying description of the structure of these
notes). Of the 82 passages where the translations examined diverge, Muscu-
lus may be credited with 32 to 43 per cent of the solutions, Gwalther with 18
to 42, and Luther with 13 to 48 (there are a number of passages where two of
the authors, Luther and Gwalther or Musculus and Luther, agree with each
other). The results indicate the strong inﬂuence exerted by Musculus’ and
Gwalther’s work in the Slovenian-speaking areas.

5. Main Sources

Primus Truber, Catechismus, Tübingen 1550.
Primus Truber, Abecedarium vnd der klein Catechismus, Tü-
bingen 1550.
Primus Truber, CATECHISMVS, Tübingen 1555.
Primus Truber,  TA  EVANGELI  SVETIGA  MATEVSHA,
Tübingen 1555.
Primus Truber,  TA  PERVI  DEIL  TIGA  NOVIGA  TESTA-
MENTA, Tübingen 1557.
Primus Truber, TA DRVGI DEIL TIGA NOVIGA TESTA-
MENTA, Tübingen 1560.
Primus Truber, SVETIGA PAVLA TA DVA LISTY, Tübingen
1561.
Primus Truber, Ta Celi Pɾalter Dauidou, Tübingen 1566.
Primus Truber, SVETIGA PAVLA LYSTVVI, Tübingen 1567.
Primus Truber,  ENI  PSALMI,  TA  CELI  CATEhiɾmus,  Tü-
bingen 1567.
Primus Truber,  CATEHISMVS  SDVEIMA  ISLAGAMA,
Tübingen 1575.
Primus Truber,  NOVIGA  TESTAMENTA  PVSLEDNI
DEIL, Tübingen 1577.

1581–1582.
Georg Dalmatin, BIBLIA, Wittenberg 1584.
Antonio Brucioli (transl.), Nuovo testamento di Giesu Christo
salvatore nostro, Lyon 1552.
Bernardin  Spljecˇanin,  Lekcionarij  Bernardina  Splje´canina  po
prvom izdanju od god. 1495, Zagreb 1885.
Desiderius Erasmus  Roterodamus,  Novum  testamentum  per
D. Erasmum  Roterodamum  novißime  recognitum,  Parisiis
1542.

TC 1550
TA 1550

TC 1555
TE 1555

TT 1557

TT 1560

TL 1561

TPs 1566
TL 1567
TPs 1567

TC 1575

TT 1577

DB 1584
BB

Be 1885

EB

134

TT 1581–82 Primus Truber,  TA  CELI  NOVI  TESTAMENT,  Tübingen

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Musculus, Gwalther, Luther, Erasmus

GB
Ju

LB 1545

MPs

Vu
WPs

ZB

Greek text of the New Testament.
Augustinus Justinianus  (transl.),  Psalterium,  hebraeum,  grae-
cum, arabicum et chaldaeum, cum tribus latinis interpretatio-
nibus et glossis, Genuae 1516.
Die Luther-Bibel: Originalausgabe 1545 und revidierte Fassung
1912: 2. Ausgabe, Berlin 2000 (Digitale Bibliothek 29).
Wolfgang Musculus,  In  sacrosanctum  Dauidis  Psalterium
Commentarii, Basileae 1556.
Vulgate, 1969.
Rudolph Gwalther, Die kleine Bibel: Oder der Psalter Davids,
Zürich 1831.
Ulrich Zwingli, Die gantze Bibel, Zürich 1531.

Kozma  Ahacˇicˇ,  Scientiﬁc  Research  Centre  of  the  Slovenian  Academy  of
Sciences and Arts, Ljubljana

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

135

Kozma Ahacˇicˇ

136

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

