Gary Jenkins

Dinner with Raphael

Dinner with Raphael

The prolegomena of Peter Martyr Vermigli’s Eucharistic Intellections

by Gary Jenkins

«When it is said that Raphael did not eat, it must not be understood as though he
did not eat at all, but that he did not eat in a human manner [.. .] when the angel
answered that he uses spiritual meat and drink, that spiritual food was nothing else
than an open and manifest knowledge of the true God [.. .] The same also is our
meat, though not exactly the same. For angels see God manifestly, we through a
mirror, and in a riddle [.. .] those who believe in Christ [.. .] I say that they both eat
the ﬂesh of Christ and drink his blood, to which use the symbols or signs, since
they stir up the senses, are very proﬁtable. Not that the ﬂesh and blood of Christ
are poured into the bread and wine, or are by any means included in those el-
ements, but because those things are by the believers received with a true faith. For
these are invisible nourishment, and received only in the mind.» 1

This essay began as a footnote to a larger study, one looking at Peter Martyr
Vermigli’s epistemology as it relates to both his Eucharistic theology and his
belief that faith is an act of the intellect, and how both are understood within
the constraints of his Aristotelianism. 2 In treating this other matters invari-

1

2

Peter Martyr Vermigli, In librum Iudicum commentarii, Zurich: Christoph Froschauer, 1561,
152v: «Quare cum in altero textu dicitur, Raphaelem non comedisse, non ita est intelligen-
dum, quasi prorsus non comederit, sed quod human more non comederit. Illud aut imprimis
animadvertendum ibi est, cum angelus respondet, se invisibili cibo ac potu vesci, eam alimon-
iam spiritualem nihil aliud fuisse, quam apertam et perspicuam notitiam veri dei [.. .] Idem
etiam noster cibus est, quamvis non eiusdem modi; illi enim aperte deum vident; nos autem
per speculum, et in aenigmate. Quibus addas etiam eos qui credunt Christo, et certo sibi per-
suadent, eum sua causa esse mortuum, et comedere carnem Christi, et eius bibere sanguinem,
ad quem usum symbola dum sensum excitant, plurimum conferunt; non quod caro Christi et
sanguis in panem et vinum infundantur, aut elementis illis aliquo modo concludantur, sed
quod res illae vera ﬁde a credentibus percipiantur. Sunt enim invisibilis alimonia, quae mente
solum capitur.» – Martyr then adds, «ut Augustinus ﬁdeliter monuit: Quid, inquiens, paras
dentem et ventrem? Crede et manducasti.» Emphasis in the translated text added, and these
two terms shall be touched on again in the conclusion.
Beyond an examination of how faith is an intellectual act, the intended essay examines how
Martyr’s epistemology could circumvent the problems comprehended in Aristotle’s agent in-
tellect, and what these problems might entail for Martyr’s Eucharistic doctrine: namely that
what the soul intellects is formally the same as the pragmata of intellection. If Martyr extri-
cates himself from the formal link, how can he then avoid not merely a Nestorian sacramen-
tology, but more especially a Docetic Eucharistic faith, the tacit and otherwise contention of
his protagonists. The most pressing matters, however, entail Martyr’s use of causality and its
link to epistemology (and how these are affected by the scholastic reconﬁguration of the in-
tellect), how he employs Aristotle’s teaching that forms exist in concrete realities, and how

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

103

Dinner with Raphael

Gary Jenkins

ably intruded that generated this paper in regard to Martyr’s use of Christol-
ogy in the deﬁnition of his Eucharistic thought, viz., the dissonant use (as
will be argued) of an enigmatic theologian, the ﬁfth-century father, Blessed
Theodoret of Cyrus. Not to slight any angels by looking at «the blessed»,
Raphael  will  return  in  the  essay’s  conclusion;  the  Stagerite,  however,  will
have to wait.

Peter Martyr Vermigli, formally and materially, at least by Roman Cath-
olic lights, was a heretic. The reasons annexed for this judgment only indi-
rectly touch the matter of this essay. The chief concern here, rather, is Mar-
tyr’s appropriation of certain avenues of argument and his use of theological
analogies and syllogisms as they appear in Theodoret of Cyr (393–457/66).
The opacity of Theodoret of Cyr’s thought arose from the debates that con-
cern the Council of Chalcedon (AD 451), both the runup and the sequel, and
how the council interpreted the theology of St. Cyril of Alexandria. Theodo-
ret himself had written in the 430s and 440s against Cyril’s theology, and ex-
pressly against his twelve Anathemas of Nestorius, and had been a defender
of  the  several  theologians  who  dueled  with  Cyril,  including  Theodore  of
Mopsuestia. Theodoret faced censure and deposition, but was eventually re-
instated following a rather ﬂattering letter to pope Leo I. Different historians
and theologians have lined up defending or indicting Theodoret: both ob-
servant Catholics and Orthodox, as well as the odd Anglo-catholic have de-
fended him, and those of the same confessions have slighted his orthodoxy.
The most recent sortie into this ﬁeld is Paul B. Clayton’s «The Christology
of Theodoret of Cyrus». 3 Assessing Theodoret’s theology faces several ob-
stacles. One material cause of this ambiguity, is the decree of the ﬁfth ecu-
menical  council,  the  second  of  Constantinople,  in  553.  Animated  by  the
political hopes of the theologically astute emperor, Justinian I, the Council
condemned Theodoret’s expressly anti-Cyrillian writings. The council was
not discriminating of Theodoret’s works in what it placed in the condemned
«Three Chapters»; it simply stated that those which spoke against Cyril were
indicted. 4 Though Leo I the Great had rehabilitated Theodoret (condemned

3

4

both of these are handled by Martyr in his making faith an intellectual act. To answer prop-
erly the questions involved entails treating how exactly Martyr, in whatever way an Aristote-
lian, employed and applied the teachings of the Philosopher to his theology.
Paul B. Clayton, The Christology of Theodoret of Cyrus, Oxford 2007.
The three chapters were the entire corpus of Theodore of Mopsuestia, the anti-Cyrillian writ-
ings of Ibas of Edessa, and the offending works of Theodoret «in which [he] had attacked the
anathematisms of Cyril of Alexandria and the Council of Ephesus (431), and in which he spe-
ciﬁcally rejected any form of theopaschism.» The ﬁrst condemnation came from Justinian in
544. Cf. Jean Meyendorff, Christ in Eastern Christian Thought, Crestwood 1975, 80–81. For
a full discussion of Justinian, his thought along with supporting documents, and the contro-
versy over the Three Chapters, see On the Person of Christ: The Christology of Emperor
Justinian, trans. Kenneth P Wesche, Crestwood 1991.

104

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Dinner with Raphael

in the Latrocinium council of Ephesus in 449), and though then admitted to
sit at the Council of Chalcedon, having subscribed to the Twelve Chapters
and condemned Nestorius, as Patrick Gray has noted, Theodoret never tran-
scended the suspicions of the Cyrillians of the council (one mention of him in
the Acta identiﬁed him as a «disguised Nestorian»). 5 He lived till 457 or 466,
continuing his writing, and died in the communion of the Church. Thus,
there was no question in 553 of condemning him per se. But the condem-
nation met resistance, both from Rome and in the East, as a number of Chal-
cedonians had used Theodoret, especially in the latter half of the ﬁfth cen-
tury,  against  the  Monophysites.  Indeed  Rome  did  not  want  to  accept  the
condemnation, for it had been Leo I the Great who had exonerated Theodo-
ret, 6 but Pope Vigilius eventually agreed to the action.

Those writings of Theodoret that were overtly opposed to the Alexan-
drian theology comprised only a portion of his corpus. 7 Thus the question is,
should all of the remainder then be viewed as ample food for the soul of the
faithful? Here more problems emerge: while some strict Orthodox refer to
Theodoret as «blessed Theodoret», 8 as Fr. Jean Meyendorff, Patrick Gray,
and  Paul  Clayton  have  pointed  out,  Theodoret  accepted,  but  only  with  a
Nestorian gloss, the faith professed at Chalcedon, Cyril of Alexandria’s as-
sertions about the One Christ as expressed in the Formula of Union of 433,
Leo’s Tome and the Council’s decree. His reputation’s revival rested on many
seeing Chalcedon as a corrective to Cyril, exempliﬁed in modern scholars
seeing a Neo-Chalcedonian party. This interpretation, identiﬁed with such
historians of doctrine as J. N. D. Kelly and Jaroslav Pelikan (at least in his
earlier works), inter alios, is now questioned. One place the revisionists point
to is Theodoret’s comments on the words of St. Luke at the end of the second
chapter of his Gospel, that Christ grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor
with God and man: Theodoret applied these only to Christ’s human nature,
not to the Word, and while he nowhere ever identiﬁes the prosopon of Christ
with the prosopon of the Word, he does take pains to distinguish them. His
letter to John of Aegae, written subsequent to Chalcedon, gives the measure
of Theodoret’s ambivalence toward the Council. The Chalcedonian formula,

5

6

Patrick T. R. Gray, The Defense of Chalcedon in the East. 451–553, Leiden 1979, 8–16.
Ibid. This rehabilitation was based upon, as Gray puts it, the evidence of one very ﬂattering
letter to the Pontiff and the emperor. Gray goes on to show that Theodoret’s place in the
council was minimal, due to his fellow bishops open hostility to him.

7 Most notably his «Apology for Diodorus and Theodore», and his condemnation of Cyril’s 12
Anathemas and defense of Nestorius. Much of Theodoret’s work is lost, but his extant works
ﬁll four volumes of Migne, plus several other pieces collected since. A good bit of this is com-
mentary on the Scriptures.
See, for example, the discussion of Theodoret’s work in Georges Florovsky, The Byzantine
Fathers Of the Sixth to Eighth Century, Vol. IX of Collected Works (Belmont, 1987).

8

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

105

Gary Jenkins

according to the letter, could only make for two readings: that the one hypo-
stasis was that of a composite physis (a deformed Monophysitism, or more
aptly, Eutycheanism), or else that it was a prosopon of union, i.e., Nestori-
anism. 9 Chalcedon assumed a minor footnote to his theology, or at best as
some corrective or revision of Cyril. While having condemned his old friend,
Nestorius, at Chalcedon, he never would admit to the theology that saw the
one prosopon of the Incarnate Christ as identical with the hypostasis of the
Divine Logos. As Clayton puts it, «after his participation in Chalcedon, his
only way to justify the expression one hypostasis in two physeis is to make it
mean a union in prosopon – that is, kata prosopon.» 10 Because defenders of
Chalcedon  employed  Theodoret,  he  became  a  stone  of  stumbling  for  the
Monophysites.  For  many,  both  after  the  Council  of  Chalcedon  and  even
today, Theodoret’s most famous theological treatise, the «Eranistes», is read
simply  as  an  anti-Monophysite  tract  (though  written  against  Eutyches,
whom the Monophysites also condemned), failing to see its essential Nes-
torian and anti-Cyrillian character. 11 The implications of this for Peter Mar-
tyr must now be examined.

Martyr linked analogically his Eucharistic theology and his Christology
proper. To this end, he employed Theodoret in two distinct settings, though
both of them in regard to his Eucharistic polemic. First Theodoret served as a
foil of Roman Catholics with regard to transubstantiation during the Oxford
Disputation of 1549, and then similarly in the subsequent «Tractatio» on the
Eucharist. He used this anti-transubstantiation tactic as well with his «De-
fensio» of Cranmer against Gardiner. His other use of Theodoret pertained
to his arguments with the Lutherans, and Johannes Brenz in particular, in the
«Dialogus de utraque in Christo natura». 12 Martyr put Theodoret into ser-
vice to assail the Lutheran doctrine of the omnipresent nature of Christ’s di-
vinized human nature, and thus, consequently, a presence in, with, and under
the Eucharistic elements, a doctrine dubbed ubiquitarianism.

With respect to the Catholics the polemical use of Theodoret is readily ap-
parent: here, a notable Church Father, one who though at one time a heretic,
namely a Nestorian, but who had been as well rehabilitated by no one less

Ibid, 51.

9 Clayton, Theodoret, 275–277.
10
11 Clayton spends considerable effort in detailing the «Eranistes’» Nestorian nature. This view
is also maintained by Francis Sullivan, The Christology of Theodore of Mopsuestia, Rome
1956; and Edward Kilmartin, The Eucharist in the West: History and Theology, ed., Robert
J. Daly, Collegeville, MN 1998; and Patrick Gray.

12 Zurich: Christoph Froschauer, 1561. English translation: Peter Martyr Vermigli, Dialogue on
the Two Natures in Christ, ed. John Patrick Donnelly, Kirksville, MO 1995 (Sixteenth Cen-
tury Essay and Studies 31). All quotations from the «Dialogus» are taken from Donnelly’s
translation.

106

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Dinner with Raphael

than Pope St. Leo the Great, had set out in his three-part dialogue, «Eran-
istes» 13, a deﬁnition of the Eucharist hardly commensurate with the Catholic
doctrine of transubstantiation. Written about 448 prior to his rehabilitation,
Theodoret,  addressing  the  main  questions  of  Christology,  makes  several
analogies,  drawn  on  Eucharistic  considerations,  about  the  nature  of  the
union of the two natures in Christ. Martyr adopts Theodoret’s Eucharistic
analogies, wherein the ﬁfth-century father – at times defending Theodore of
Mopsuestia  against  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  and  at  other  times  aiming  at  Eu-
tyches – asserts a Eucharistic theology opposing the Eutychian and putative
Monophysite  notion  that  the  Eucharistic  elements  undergo  a  substantial
change analogous to the change of Christ’s ﬂesh at the ascension. 14 Martyr’s
anti-Catholic polemic rests on Theodoret’s legacy as a Nestorian prodigal re-
turned home. He notes at the 1549 Oxford disputation that Theodoret was
«held to be most learned and eloquent [.. .] a learned man and saintly member
of Christ’s church.» 15 Martyr, further, casts him as a defender of the faith
against the Eutycheans (and implicitly the Lutherans): «He stands against
those who denied that Christ had a true body, saying that at the time of the
ascension his body was completely changed into the divine nature.» In the
«Defensio  contra  Gardineram»  Martyr  uses  Theodoret’s  Eucharistic  anal-
ogy, that as the bread remains within the Eucharist unconverted, so too does
Christ remain in his human nature, unconverted, in heaven. For Martyr, of
course, the analogy is simply reversed. 16

This  all  is  fairly  stable  ground  with  respect  to  formal  Christological
matters, but Martyr’s use of Theodoret in the «Dialogus» presents a number
of difﬁculties. The «Dialogus», formally a Christological dialogue, materi-
ally and in intent is a treatise on the Eucharist. Since the early 1520s, and
given fulsome ampliﬁcation at Marburg in 1529, Luther and his colleagues
had argued that the humanity of Christ was animated and deﬁned, since the
resurrection and ascension, by the inﬁnite power of God entailed in the no-
tion  of  «God’s  right  hand». 17  Thus  the  humanity  of  Christ  was  present

Jacques Paul Migne, Patrologia cursus completus, Series Graecae [MPG], vol 83.

13
14 Kilmartin, Eucharist in the West, 37–41.
15 Peter Martyr Vermigli, The Oxford Treatise and Disputation on the Eucharist, trans and ed.

Joseph C. McLelland, Kirksville, MO 2000 (Sixteenth Century Essay and Studies 56), 55.

16 Defensio  doctrinae  veteris  et  Apostolici  de  sacrosancto  eucharistiae  sacramento  adversus
Stephanam Gardinerem, Zurich: Christoph Froschauer, 1559. Martyr’s use of Theodoret’s
analogy p. 385 ff, 575ff. Cf. Joseph McLelland, The Visible Words of God: A study in the
theology of Peter Martyr, 1500–1562, Edinburgh 1957, 104–110.

17 Luther’s doctrine of the real presence slighted transubstantiation, and he had come to this
conclusion before his debates about the issue with Karlstadt in 1523, and certainly well before
the disputes with Zwingli and Oecolampadius beginning in 1526. He had garnered his doc-
trine at least some ten years prior to the famous confrontation at the Marburg Colloquy from
Pierre d’Ailly, who had maintained the real presence without holding to transubstantiation.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

107

Gary Jenkins

throughout all creation, not «chained» to the right hand of God as if in some
location. To the Lutherans, this was a natural consequence of the doctrine of
the hypostatic union and the communicatio idiomatum. Pantachus, Martyr’s
appellation for Brenz in the «Dialogus», asserts, and here citing Pope Gela-
sius (d. 496), that «the whole man continues to be what God is, as the whole
God continues to be whatever a man is.» 18 For Brenz, the hypostatic union
renders the human nature of Christ coextensive or coterminus with the di-
vine nature, and in this way presents us with a new reading of not only Ge-
lasius,  but  also  Cyril  of  Alexandria.  Martyr  correctly  saw  this  Lutheran
idiom as an overstatement of the case. His retort, aside from tacitly accusing
Brenz of Monophysitism, focused on the distinction of natures made em-
phatically dogmatic by the 433 formula of union, and explicit by Chalcedon.
Martyr minces no words that he holds without reservation «the three creeds,
namely the Apostles’, Nicene, and Athanasian creeds, as well as the ﬁrst six
Councils, in what they deﬁned regarding the most blessed Trinity, the person
of the Son of God and his two natures [.. .]» 19 Martyr had already declared
that, «Christ is one person, but he has two natures conjoined in the same hy-
postasis but both retain their properties intact and whole.» 20 Within this con-
fession, Martyr’s Christology is nothing other than Orthodox and Catholic,
inviolate in form and creed (leaving aside the question of the Athanasian for-
mula). But this statement says more than what Martyr wished. His employ-
ment of Theodoret, inter alia, puts Martyr opposite the last two councils
which he here declares he embraces.

Martyr’s reading of Theodoret betrays an equivocation in his use of terms:
namely, Word, Son, nature, and Christ – equivocations made all the more
problematic given, as herein argued, Theodoret’s veiled Nestorianism. First,
Martyr pressed the identity of the Word with the divine nature almost to an
equation of the two. Care must be taken, but it is evident that he tries to
stretch  what  the  Word’s  divinity  entails  beyond  what  Cyril  did.  Martyr
maintains that «the divine nature of the Word is incapable of death and really
can’t be said to have died.» He then cites Theodoret from part III of the «Er-
anistes», [Impatibilis]:

Luther admits as early as 1520 in his «The Babylonian Captivity of the Church» to having
read d’Ailly, whose teaching on this was expressed in his «Quaestiones super libros Senten-
tiarum».  The  central  place  of  ubiquitarianism  in  Luther’s  teaching  is  set  out  in  Hermann
Sasse, This is My Body: Luther’s contention for the Real Presence in the Sacrament of the
Altar, Minneapolis 1959. Davis questions Sasse’s contention about ubiquity’s centrality, as-
serting that ubiquity for Luther was little more than a guarantor of the Word effecting God’s
promises.  See  Thomas Davis,  This  is  My  Body:  The  Presence  of  Christ  in  Reformation
Thought, Grand Rapids 2008, 41–63.

18 Vermigli, Dialogue on the Two Natures in Christ, 28.
19 Vermigli, Dialogue on the Two Natures in Christ, 23.
20

Ibid.

108

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Dinner with Raphael

«But those who hear of the passion of God’s Son don’t do even this [distinguishing
between body and soul]; rather they give no thought to the body, to which the suf-
fering pertains; and then the passion would prove, by the language it uses, that the
divine nature, which is impassible and immutable and immortal, is mortal and able
to suffer. And when they know this, the assumption of the body would have been
superﬂuous, if the nature of God the Word could suffer.» 21

Martyr cites Theodoret further: «If he, who before the incarnation could not
suffer, after the incarnation suffered, he suffered by undergoing a change.
And if he, who before becoming a man was immortal, tasted death after be-
coming a man [.. .] he was radically changed, from immortal to mortal.» In
introducing this section, Martyr noted that «the divine nature of God the
Word is incapable of death and really can’t be said to have died.» 22 Martyr’s
imprecision, here and elsewhere, can be attributed to what he believed Brenz
was teaching, that the Lutheran use of the communicatio idiomatum was no-
thing other than a confusion of the two natures in Christ. But his argument
here goes beyond this: the identiﬁcation of the Word with the divine nature
precludes the Word from assuming the foibles of human nature. Martyr, by
rightly noting the impassibility of the divine nature, then identiﬁes this as a
limiting term to the hypostasis of the Word.

What this does is then leave Martyr open to the charge of Nestorianism,
not merely by the confusion, but what this then would lead him to assert
about the Word’s relation to the humanity. The really damning, or as might
be said, anathematizing, quote, or better put, commentary on a quote, comes
next:

«In his third dialogue [Theodoret] adds, ‹Saint Peter in his catholic epistle says that
Christ suffered in the ﬂesh. But he who hears Christ understands not the incor-
poreal God the Word, but the incarnate Word. The name of Christ signiﬁes both
natures. That the Word was subjected to suffering in the ﬂesh signiﬁes that one na-
ture, not both, suffered. He who hears that Christ suffered in the ﬂesh again rec-
ognizes  him  as  the  impassible  God,  but  attributes  the  suffering  to  the  ﬂesh
alone.› » 23

This assertion obliterates the union that the Word has with human nature, for
at best it makes it little more than a ﬁction, and effectively creates, as had
Nestorius, two Words. A few folios on, Martyr cites Theodoret’s citation of
Eustathius, and observes that, «These words also show which properties are
so much a part of human nature that they cannot be communicated to the

21

22

23

Ibid, 63.
Ibid, 62.
Ibid, 63–64. Donnelly’s translation has an opening quote at the beginning of the quotation
from Theodoret, but no closing quote. He also attributes the quotation to 1 Peter 3,18 (which
reads «He was put to death for us in the ﬂesh»), but it is 1 Peter 4,1. The citation of Theodoret
is from MPG 83, 263A.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

109

Gary Jenkins

Word.» 24  One  must  ask,  is  anything  created  communicable  then  to  the
Word?  Can  anything  be  assumed?  What  might  Gregory  of  Nazianzenus
think of this theology?

Martyr then quotes Cyril of Alexandria from his letter to John of Anti-

och:

«‹Besides, we all confess that the Word of God is impassible even though in dis-
tributing wisely this mystery the Word seems to have attributed to itself the suf-
fering that happened uniquely to the ﬂesh. That wise man Peter says as much,
‘Christ suffered in the ﬂesh’ for us; he did not say, ‘in the nature of his ineffable di-
vinity’.› [.. .] From this passage it is already taken for granted that the sufferings of
Christ belong to his ﬂesh, but it speaks about the Word insofar as the Word at-
tributes them to itself. And so they belong to the Word in the judgment and state-
ment of Scripture, not because the Word Itself really suffered and died.» 25

The telling point is that Martyr gives this passage a sense that stands Cyril on
his head. 26 Cyril now professes that the Word should not be attributed with
the sufferings of the human nature, but only that He «seems» to suffer. From
this Martyr then commits a grave error, when he fails to read the distinction
that Cyril so clearly maintained, that the Word truly suffered, but not in His
divine, but in his human nature. Martyr, commensurate with what was al-
ready cited, makes the communicatio idiomatum a seeming ﬁction, appropri-
ated by Christ only in appearance. He then proceeds to muddle that about
which Cyril was so explicit:

«When Cyril said that the Word suffered in the ﬂesh, he gave offence to many
people. To absolve himself he wrote in his twelfth Anathema ‹But because we say
that it was exclusively his own body that he received from the holy Virgin, we are
on very solid ground in saying that the sufferings of the ﬂesh belonged to him ac-
cording to the distribution of properties, taking into consideration everywhere his
impassible nature. For God comes from God. Therefore when he is said to suffer
in the ﬂesh, he is not to be understood as suffering in his own proper nature, for
his body that is united to him was created, as I said earlier›, and so forth. Therefore
he himself asserts that the Word did not suffer in its own nature.»

It can be argued that Martyr here teaches that the Word does not suffer in the
divine nature, and with this Cyril would certainly agree. But this is not what
Martyr is saying, and indeed he has confused Cyril’s use of Word and nature,

24

Ibid, p. 66.
Ibid, p. 67. The letter is often referred to by its Latin title «Laetentur coeli». Emphasis added.
25
26 Martyr translated (cid:1)ρ(cid:3)(cid:4)τ(cid:6) (the middle and passive present optative forms of (cid:1)ρ(cid:7)ω) as seems
instead of is seen. I am working off the text in MPG 77,180. In Martyr’s original text (Dialo-
gus, 39v), he translated (cid:1)ρ(cid:3)(cid:4)τ(cid:6), as videatur. It could be translated into English as is seen, yet
this would then go against Martyr’s argument, and I agree fully with Donnelly’s translation of
seems. My thanks to John Patrick Donnelly for his aid on this text.

110

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Dinner with Raphael

making them univocal terms. He then goes on to quote again from Theodo-
ret, and here Martyr’s argument falls short of ecumenical Christology:

«‹Whatever divine names the Scripture leaves free from suffering, you too should
allow to be free without attributing his suffering to them. God never joined suf-
fering to this terminology›, and so forth. He [Martyr writing of Theodoret] adds,
‹He does not permit this expression, ‘the Word suffered in the ﬂesh’. He says,
‘This speaks about the manner of his suffering, not his inability to suffer’. Nobody
has said this about the human soul. Would anybody say, unless completely sense-
less, that the soul of Paul died in the ﬂesh? This would not even be said about the
most depraved and criminal of men. Even the wicked have immortal souls. But we
say, for example, that the murderer is killed, but no one would say that his soul was
killed in the ﬂesh›, and so forth.» 27

Martyr then adds, «But this author admits that Christ suffered in the ﬂesh, as
did Peter, but he by no means allows the expression that the Word suffered in
the ﬂesh.» Here Martyr has fallen short of Cyril, Ephesus, and indeed Leo
and  Chalcedon:  he  has  distinguished,  as  had  Nestorius,  Christ  from  the
Word. In order more emphatically to reinforce the case concerning the dis-
tinctions of the human nature from the Person of the Word, Martyr adduces
Gregory of Nazianzenus from his oft cited letter to Cledonius. He calls on
Gregory to assert that the union of the Word with human nature is only ver-
bal, and that we should be careful always to preserve the Word’s impassibil-
ity.

«If anybody says that the Lord’s ﬂesh came down from heaven and does not have
its origin with us here [NB Martyr omits ‹nor of us though above us›], let him be
anathema. For ‹the second man is from heaven›, and ‹as is the man from heaven, so
are those who are of heaven›. And, ‹no one has ascended into heaven but he who
descended from heaven, the Son of Man [NB: Martyr omits ‹which is in heaven›]›
[. . .] 28 [and in] other similar passages [as those just quoted], we must understand
that those expressions are the result of the union with man, for instance, that ‹all
things were made› through Christ and ‹that Christ may dwell in our hearts›. It is
not as God that he appears but as he is understood, with the terms applied as are
also the natures.»

But Martyr omits the last clause from the last sentence: «ﬂowing into one an-
other according to the law of their intimate union.» 29 Earlier in the letter,
Gregory had already written

«God and man are two natures, as also soul and body are, but not two sons or two
gods. For neither in this life are there two manhoods, even though Paul speaks
using such language as of the inner and outer man. And, if I may speak directly, the

27

28

29

Ibid, p. 67
Ibid, p. 68. The citation from Gregory is in MPG 37,181. The letter runs cols 175A-193B.
κα(cid:11) περι(cid:15)ωρ(cid:6)υσω¨´ ν ε(cid:19)ς (cid:21)λλ(cid:23)λας τ(cid:3)(cid:4) λ(cid:24)γ(cid:3)ω τ(cid:26)ς συµφυ(cid:28)ας. MPG 37,181C.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

111

Gary Jenkins

Savior is composed of that which is distinct from each other, for the invisible is not
the same as the visible, nor the eternal with what is time-bound, yet he is not di-
vided. Let this never be said! For both natures are one by the union, the deity made
man ((cid:29)νανθρωπ(cid:23)σαντ(cid:6)ς), and the human deiﬁed (θεωθ(cid:31)ντ(cid:6)ς).» 30

Martyr, Aristotelian though he was, had fallen into an undesirable syllogism.
Francis A. Sullivan S. J., in his «Christology of Theodore of Mopsuestia»
ﬁnds the theological distinctions between Antioch (prior to John of Anti-
och’s  reconciliation  with  Cyril  in  433)  and  Alexandria  arising  from  how
Theodore on the one hand and Athanasius on the other responded to the es-
sential Arian Syllogism: The word is the subject even of the human oper-
ations and sufferings of Christ (major premise); but whatever is predicated of
the Word, must be predicated of him κατ(cid:7) φ!σιν (minor premise); ergo, the
nature of the Word is limited and affected by the human operations and suf-
ferings of Christ. 31 The Antiochians denied the major premise, the Alexan-
drians the minor. 32 This is evident in Peter Martyr, but for him the reaction is
not one predicated upon defending the Word’s divinity, but instead arises
from having found ammunition to defend his doctrines both of the Eucharist
and of justiﬁcation, ready-made in Theodoret, the blessed.

This brings us back to Raphael. Though Peter Martyr did not form his
Eucharistic theology solely within the context of his polemic, which seems
more to have been the character of Luther’s efforts, he nonetheless did con-
struct it in conjunction with his soteriology. While there is a material union
of God and man in the Incarnation, this does not effect an individual’s sal-
vation; it gives no hope to the damned. Obtaining the beneﬁts of Christ de-
manded more than what the immediate reality of the Incarnation proffered.
For Martyr, the beneﬁts of union with Christ are not mediated to the Chris-
tian through bread and wine, but mediated to the soul by faith, the bread and
the wine being instruments by which the Incarnation’s beneﬁts come to the
Christian. This is what true eating and drinking were, just as they were for
Raphael. Thus, the ﬂesh of Christ, verbally (and seemingly not really and
fully) the ﬂesh of the Word, nonetheless proﬁts nothing in regard to union
with God, except by way of analogy: in the bread Christians see the body of
Christ, but they must look beyond this with faith, and look beyond the ma-
terial to the eternal. Martyr’s making the suffering of Christ only in the ﬂesh

30

31

Ibid, 180A.
Sullivan, Christology of Theodore, 162. Sullivan elaborates on this insight for some pages,
but  draws  the  Alexandrian  recognition  of  it,  and  its  response  to  it,  from  St. Athanasius’
«Against the Arians», the second book, pp. 162–65. Paul Clayton picks up on this insight as
well: Christology of Theodoret, 283, et cetera.

32 The rejection of the minor premise for Athanasius et al., rests on the fact that it saw but one
nature in Christ. While things predicated are predicated according to nature, Christ has two
natures, temporal and eternal.

112

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

Dinner with Raphael

abstracted from the Word, rings consonant with aspects of his soteriology:
while faith could use material instruments, which the Eucharist was, what
the sacraments promised was only realized in the world to come. Salvadore
Corda has pointed out that the beneﬁts the Romanists attached to the Eu-
charist (physical union with Christ) Martyr reserved for the world to come. 33
In this world the Christian had no salviﬁc union with Christ apart from that
effected by faith, one which made us move beyond the visual, beyond mir-
rors and enigmas, to the union of Christ with the believer in the mind, that is
en mentem. Faith, an intellection, was the vehicle to obtain Christ, and not
the ﬂesh, which proﬁts nothing, at least as far as this life is concerned.

Martyr’s acceptance of the ﬁrst six councils did not impede his Eucharistic
appropriation of Theodoret. Many Monophysites had balked at accepting
Chalcedon  because  it  had  not  condemned  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia.  This
oversight, it may be said, was rectiﬁed by the ﬁfth council, which not only
posthumously condemned Theodore, but which also maintained that One of
the Holy Trinity suffered, adopting the term, which Martyr took such pains
to deny, Theopaschism. This is not to valorize the Lutheran doctrine, but
that Martyr in an attempt to answer the error he perceived in the Lutherans,
had, and seemingly athwart his own admissions, fallen into another.

Prof. Dr. Gary Jenkins, Eastern University, St. Davids, PA

33

Salvatore Corda, Veritas Sacramenti: A study in Vermigli’s doctrine of the Lord’s Supper, Zu-
rich 1975 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 6), 170–178.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

113

Gary Jenkins

114

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

