Daniel Timmerman

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

Church and eschatology in Bullinger’s sermons

on the book of Daniel (1565)

by Daniel Timmerman

1. Introduction

Modern biblical scholarship has located the book of Daniel at the crossroads
of the older prophetic tradition in Israel and the newer genre of apocalyptic
literature. As prophetic literature it conveys the eschatological hope for the
restoration of Israel and gives a description of the prophetic ﬁgure of Daniel.
As apocalyptic literature it reveals by means of heavenly visions and the in-
terpretation of an angelic intermediary the imminence of the ﬁnal destruc-
tion of the wicked and the resurrection of the saints. Building upon older
traditions, the book in its present form was composed to encourage and em-
power the Jewish community in the post-exilic period. 1

After  its  integration  into  the  Christian  canon,  the  book  of  Daniel  has
found many new interpretations within the community of the church. The
present  essay  aims  to  highlight  the  contribution  of  the  sixteenth-century
theologian Heinrich Bullinger to the interpretation of this book within the
context of sixteenth-century Protestant Europe. This exercise will not only
tell us something about the book of Daniel and sixteenth-century Protestant-
ism, but will also contribute to a better understanding of the life and thought
of Bullinger who, not unlike the prophetic ﬁgure of Daniel, understood him-
self to be an interpreter of God’s will for his own community. 2

Bullinger’s interest in the book of Daniel dates back to at least 1530, when
he wrote a commentary on Daniel 7. 3 This essay, however, will be devoted to
the 66 sermons on the book of Daniel that Bullinger published in August
1565. 4 From his «Diarium» we know that he preached on the book of Daniel

1

E.g. Rolf Rendtorff, Theologie des Alten Testaments: Ein kanonischer Entwurf, vol. 1: Ka-
nonische Grundlegung, Neukirchen 1999, 359–362.

2 Within weeks of accepting his position as antistes of the Zurich church, Bullinger deﬁned the
prophetic  task  of  the  Protestant  preacher  in  his  1532  treatise  «De  prophetae  ofﬁcio»  (cf.
Heinrich Bullinger Bibliographie, Bd. 1: Beschreibendes Verzeichnis der gedruckten Werke
von Heinrich Bullinger, ed. Joachim Staedtke, Zürich 1972 [Heinrich Bullinger Werke I/1]
[cit. HBBibl 1], no 33).

3 De Hebdomadis, quae apud Danielem sunt, opusculum (cf. HBBibl 1, no 27).
4 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, qui a vetustis polyhistor, id est multiscius est dictus, ex-
positus homiliis LXVI, quibus non tam sensus prophetae redditur, quam usus et fructus pro-
phetiae ostenditur, adeoque omnibus in ecclesia docentibus commonstratur, quomodo per-

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

85

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

Daniel Timmerman

on Tuesdays, beginning May 18, 1563. 5 Bullinger hoped that the publication
of these sermons would prove useful for the church in general, and for its
ministers  in  particular. 6  This  hope  was  severely  tested  in  1564  when  the
plague not only compelled him to lay down all of his activities, but even made
him fear for his life. After his unexpected recovery, Bullinger was struck by a
passage in Jerome, in which the church father reveals that he devoted himself
to writing a commentary on the prophets after recovering from a serious ill-
ness. Bullinger followed Jerome’s example and resumed his sermons on Isaiah
and Daniel in January 1565. 7 In June of the same year, he completed his work
on  Daniel.  In  addition,  the  Zurich  preacher  reworked  a  twenty-year-old
manuscript treatise on world and church history, his «Epitomen temporum et
rerum ab orbe condito». 8 In August 1565, the two works were published in
one volume by the Zurich publisher Christoph Froschauer Jr.

Several authors have discussed parts of Bullinger’s «Daniel sapientissimus
dei propheta» in detail. 9 In this article I will try to sketch the outlines of his
concept of the church as the eschatological community of believers as it ap-
pears throughout the entire work. 10 After examining the historical situation
of the church in Bullinger’s own time (1), in its eschatological dimension (2),

spicue, iusto ordine et cum utilitate populo Dei, hic propheta praedicari possit (cf. HBBibl 1,
no 428). For this paper, the 1576 edition has been used (cf. HBBibl 1, no 429).

5 Heinrich Bullingers Diarium (Annales vitae) der Jahre 1504–1574, ed. Emil Egli, Basel 1904

(Quellen zur Schweizerischen Reformationsgeschichte 2) (repr. Zürich 1985), 72.

6 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, aa1r [title]: «expositus homiliis LXVI, quibus [.. .] omni-
bus in ecclesia docentibus commonstratur, quomodo perspicue, iusto ordine et cum utilitate
populo Dei, hic propheta praedicari possit.»

7 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, aa2v.; Diarium, 79–80. Starting in 1562, Bullinger prea-
ched a series on Isaiah on Sundays, cf. Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, aa2r; Diarium, 71.

8 Cf. HBBibl 1, no 430.
9

Irena Backus, The Beast: Interpretations of Daniel 7.2–9 and Apocalypse 13.1–4, 11–12 in Lu-
theran, Zwinglian and Calvinist Circles in the Late Sixteenth Century, in: Reformation and
Renaissance  Review  [2]  (2000),  59–77;  Emidio Campi,  Über  das  Ende  des  Weltzeitalters:
Aspekte der Rezeption des Danielbuches bei Heinrich Bullinger, in: Europa, Tausendjähriges
Reich und Neue Welt: Zwei Jahrtausende Geschichte und Utopie in der Rezeption des Da-
nielbuches, ed. Mariano Delgado et al., Freiburg/Stuttgart 2003 (Studien zur christlichen Re-
ligions- und Kulturgeschichte 1), 225–238; Aurelio A. García Archilla, The theology of his-
tory and apologetic historiography in Heinrich Bullinger: Truth in history, San Francisco
1992, 117–165; Anja-Silvia Göing, Schulausbildung im Kontext der Bibel: Heinrich Bullin-
gers Auslegungen des Propheten Daniel (1565), in: Emidio Campi, Peter Opitz (eds), Hein-
rich Bullinger: Life – Thought – Inﬂuence 1, eds. Emidio Campi and Peter Opitz, Zürich
2007 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 24), 437–458; Thomas Krüger, Heinrich
Bullinger als Ausleger des Alten Testaments am Beispiel seiner Predigten über Daniel 1 und 2,
in: Zwingliana 31 (2004), 91–104; Christian Moser, «Papam esse Antichristum»: Grundzüge
von Heinrich Bullingers Antichristkonzeption, in: Zwingliana 30 (2003), 65–101.

10 Cf. Peter Opitz, Heinrich Bullinger als Theologe: Eine Studie zu den «Dekaden», Zürich
2004, 432–436; Herman J. Selderhuis, Kirche am Kreuz: Die Ekklesiologie Heinrich Bullin-
gers, in: Campi/Opitz, Heinrich Bullinger, 515–536.

86

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

I will consider his view on the nature of the church (3). This will lead into a
discussion  of  the  central  message  of  consolation  and  admonition  for  the
faithful (4) as well as of the function of prophetic revelation (5), followed by a
short evaluation (6).

2. The historical situation of the church

For a correct understanding of an apocalyptic text, it is necessary to identify
the historical situation of the community in which it was ﬁrst created and
transmitted (Sitz im Leben). Or at least, how the author evaluated the situ-
ation of his community. The same procedure applies to later interpretations
and actualisations of this kind of literature. Thus, before turning to the cen-
tral message of the book of Daniel, we must ﬁrst attempt to gain an impres-
sion of the situation of the audience for which Bullinger held his sermons, or
of the readership of the printed homilies. 11

In their original setting, the prophecies of Daniel aimed to encourage the
Jewish people, either in advance as a preparation for future distress, or in the
face of present persecution and oppression. Bullinger decidedly rules out the
possibility  that  the  visions  concerning  Antiochus  were  a vaticinium  ex
eventu, which would have been a return to the old error of Porphyry. 12 Al-
though he is determined to locate the origin of the book of Daniel in the con-
text of the Jewish community in exile, his concept of Biblical theology in
which the unity of God’s covenant with his people under both the Old and
New Testament is emphasized, allows him to relate prophecies and visions to
the situation of the Christian church in general and to that of his own day in
particular. Bullinger argues that the Church was just as much in danger as the
Jewish people were during the period of captivity in Babylon, or during the
period of the reign of Antiochus Epiphanes. This raises the question as to
how he evaluated the situation of the community of Zurich, or the Protestant
movement in general around 1565. Did Bullinger have any particular prob-
lems in mind while preparing his sermons on the book of Daniel?

Bullinger  dedicated  his  «Conciones»  to  ﬁve  English  bishops  who  had
stayed  in  Zurich  for  some  time  during  the  reign  of  Mary  Tudor:  Robert
Horne (1513–1579, bishop of Winchester), John Jewel (1522–1571, bishop of
Salisbury), Edwin Sandys (1519?–1588, bishop of Worcester), John Parkhurst
(1511?–1575, bishop of Norwich), James Pilkington (1520–1576, bishop of
Durham). 13 In the prefatory epistle, however, there is no reference to the past

11

In the prefatory epistle Bullinger states that a preacher should accommodate his message to
the situation of his audience (Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, aa4r).

12 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 1v; cf. 129v.
13 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, aa2r. In his prefatory epistle, Bullinger recalls the «collo-

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

87

Daniel Timmerman

persecution of English Protestants. Rather, Bullinger congratulates the form-
er Marian exiles with their present fortune under queen Elisabeth. 14

Around 1565 the situation in France was much more precarious than it
was in England. Since the Edict of Tolerance (1562) had been enacted, the
French Protestants were engaged in a civil war with their Catholic oppo-
nents. It is likely that Bullinger was very well informed about the situation in
France, because France was both a traditional ally of the Swiss confederation
against aggression by the Habsburgs and a possible stronghold for Protes-
tantism in continental Europe. 15 In sermon 27 he refers to the war in France:
«It is now already the third year that we see the sky is burning. We see that
France is engaged in an internal conﬂict with much bloodshed and burnings,
mainly for religious reasons». 16 On one occasion Bullinger explicitly refers to
the problems of the Hugonothi who were being accused of both despising
any form of traditional authority and of rejecting the legitimacy of the pa-
pacy. 17 Although Bullinger seems to be well aware of the situation in France,
he does not often refer to the situation of the French Protestants.

More frequently does Bullinger refer to the problematic state of Chris-
tianity in general, without reference to a particular situation or place. Op-
pression and persecution appear to be the general state in which the church
ﬁnds herself. The visions in the second part of the book of Daniel «describe
the situation (status) of the church, or the people of God, and what the saints
should always expect to occur – wars and persecutions – and how they are to
conduct themselves in this situation.» 18 Oppression and persecution are con-
stant factors throughout the history of the church. 19

quiorum dulcium quae inter nos mutuo conserebamus, dum ante annos aliquot Anglia exules
religionis ergo, in Helvetia Tiguri apud nos plus minus triennio viveretis» (aa5a). Towards the
end of the epistle, he sends his regards to another thirteen former exiles with whom he was
acquainted (aa5v). For background information on these «Marian exiles», cf. Carrie Euler,
Couriers of the Gospel: England and Zurich, 1531–1558, Zürich 2006 (Zürcher Beiträge zur
Reformationsgeschichte 25), esp. 102–103. It is sometimes assumed that the future bishop of
Ely, Richard Cox, visited Zurich as well. However, in the light of Euler’s remark that there is
«no solid evidence» that Cox was ever in Zurich, it is quite remarkable that Bullinger does not
mention his name in either the dedication or the prefatory epistle (cf. Euler, Couriers, 103,
note 216).

15

14 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, aa5a: «Gratulabamur quidem vobis, ut par erat, de felici
vestro in patriam reditu, et in primis de felicissimis regni auspiciis Serenissimae reginae Eli-
sabethae.»
In a 1569 «Fürtrag» – an address from the city’s preachers to the Zurich city council – Bul-
linger shows himself to be well aware of the situation in France and pleads for ﬁnancial sup-
port for French refugees in Geneva, cf. Schriften zum Tage, ed. Hans Ulrich Bächtold et al.,
Zug 2006 (Studien und Texten zur Bullingerzeit 3), 283–86.

16 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 56r.
17 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 67v.
18 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 73r–v: «Adeoque describitur status ecclesiae vel populi
Dei a Daniele, quid expectant perpetuo sancti, bella et persequutiones, denique quomodo se

88

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

Therefore, Bullinger regularly refers to the vicissitude of the fate of the
church. 20 In Israel a pious king was often succeeded by an ungodly ruler. Ne-
buchadnezzar ﬁrst acknowledged the true God, but afterwards persecuted
his servants. 21 After a period of blessing and growth, a period of persecution
or temptation follows. Bullinger draws a parallel between the persecution of
the church under the Roman empire and the situation of Christianity in his
own time. From Nero to Constantine the Great there were 256 years of cruel
persecution and unrest turmoil for the church. Afterwards the church ﬂour-
ished  under  Christian  rulers.  For  Bullinger,  this  historical  fact  contains  a
message of consolation for the faithful. History shows that worldly enemies
will perish, but the hope of the saints will not be destroyed. 22 At the same
time,  believers  should  not  be  amazed  if  the  enemies  of  the  gospel  rise  up
again, and if the church and the preaching of the gospel appear to be eradi-
cated, even if at this moment the gospel appears to triumph. 23

Theologically, the vicissitude of the church is rooted in God’s providence.
God wants to test and purify his church, to strengthen true believers and to
punish the hypocrites and the wicked. 24 We are in God’s hand and his provi-
dence will guide and save us. But he can also cast us away into the hands of
our executioners. 25 Nothing in this world happens by chance, but God gov-
erns  everything  in  a  most  wise  and  righteous  manner. 26  For  Bullinger  the

in his gerant, sperent utique in Deum, perseverent in vera religione, invocent Deum, cui om-
nes res suas credant, a quo vicissim nunquam sint deserendi.»

19 Cf. Bullinger’s «De calamitatibus miseriisque variis patienter perferendis. Item de spe et mul-
tiiuga ﬁdelium consolatione», in: Heinrich Bullinger, Sermonum Decades quinque de potis-
simis Christianae religionis capitibus (1552), ed. Peter Opitz, Zürich 2008 (Heinrich Bullin-
ger Werke III/3.1–2), 286–312. This relatively long sermon is incorporated in a discussion of
the Ten Commandments, indirectly following the explanation of the eighth commandment
(«You shall not steal»). For Bullinger, necessity and hardship are the natural condition of
man.

20 E.g. Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 112r–v: «admiranda ecclesiae Dei vicissitudo.»
21 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 25r.
22 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 78r: «Proinde dum hodie quoque cernimus conﬂigere in-
ter se mundum, et afﬂigi ﬁdeles, illud maxime consoletur nos, quod mundus perit, spes autem
sanctorum non interit.»

23 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 25r: «Quid ergo mirum tibi videatur, si hodie quoque
nunc videatur evangelium triumphaturum et triumphare [.. .], mox tamen reviviscentibus ite-
rum evangelii hostibus, videantur hi omnes ecclesias cum ipsa praedicatione evangelii radici-
tus evulsuri? [.. .] Ergo qualis qualis sit sors et species ecclesiae, semper respicientes ad ver-
bum Dei, per patientiam et ﬁdem perseverant in vera religione.»

24 Daniel  sapientissimus  dei  propheta,  129r.  Cf.  65v,  where  he  mentions  the  «Nicodemitae,
Georgiani ac Davidiani [followers of the Dutch spiritualist leader David Joris] cum Liberti-
nis».

25 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 2v.
26 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 99v.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

89

Daniel Timmerman

doctrine of God’s providence is part of the central meaning of the book of
Daniel: the consolation of believers. 27

Although persecution and oppression are the result of God’s providential
guidance, it is clear for Bullinger that the errors of the Roman papacy are the
cause of all misery. The head of the Roman Catholic church has in fact be-
come the enemy of the true church. It appears that the cruelty exercised by
the papacy is just another manifestation of the perpetual oppression of the
saints. Commenting on Daniel 3 (De vera et falsa religione) and the attempt
on the lives of Daniel’s friends after their refusal to commit idolatry, Bulling-
er raises the following question: «Do we hear anything else today? Horrible,
cruel and vaporous decrees are enacted for the sake of the papists, in order to
burn  and  torture  without  clemency  all  who  dare  to  stand  up  against  the
church of Rome.» 28 In sermon 14 Bullinger sees a close parallel between the
sceptical attitude of rulers like Nebuchadnezzar and Sennacherib towards
Jewish religion, and the Roman Catholic persecution of heretics like John
Wycliffe.  The  papists  confront  their  evangelical  prisoners,  who  are  con-
demned to death either by imperial or ecclesiastical law, with the necessity of
obedience to the church: «What hope is left for you, since there is no sal-
vation outside the church? But you have apostasized from the church and are
like branches that have been cut off from the vine.» 29 Speaking in the past
tense, Bullinger reminds his audience in sermon 59 of the cruelties of their
enemy: history tells of, and our own sad and wavering experience testiﬁes to,
the miserable and cruel fate of many teachers of the church and their disciples
in Italy, Germany, France, Spain and England. «There is no kingdom in the
Christian world in which the persecution by the Antichrist has not raged,
and has still not stopped after so much innocent blood has been shed.» 30 For
Bullinger  these  past  and  present  outbursts  of  antichristian  aggression  re-
semble many signs of the eschaton.

27 E.g. Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 10r: «Pertinet autem haec doctrina de Deo guber-
nante omnia et Christo eiusque regno aeterno vitaque et salute ﬁdelium: principio quidem ad
conﬁrmationem promissionis divinae, qua orbi Christus est promissus servator, denique ad
consolationem afﬂictissimi populi Iudaici iam in Babylone captivi.»

28 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 26r-v: «An vero alia hodie audiuntur? Eduntur edicta
horrida truculenta et fumantia pro papismo, comburendum nempe et trucidandum esse abs-
que misericordia omnem, qui se Romanae rebellem obiecerit ecclesiae.»

29 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 28r: «Quid spei vobis est reliquum, cum extra Ecclesiam

non sit salus, vos autem defeceritis ab Ecclesia, et sitis veluti palmites a vite resecti?»

30 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 128v: «Sanguine martyrum inundavit Italia. Carceres diu
per  Germaniam  ﬁdelium  suspiriis  et  gemitibus  eiulatibusque  intonuerunt.  Quot  vero  pali
erecti, quot rogi extructi, horrendique passim ignes incensi sunt in Gallia, Hispania, Anglia?
Nulla est regio in orbe Christiano, in qua non saevierit Antichristiana persequutio, et ne nunc
quidem post tantum cruorem innoxium fusum saevire desinit.»

90

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

3. The eschatological dimension of the church

Bullinger’s  concentration  on  God’s  providence  and  the  vicissitude  of  the
church’s fate throughout all ages leaves hardly any room for a pronounced or
even apocalyptic concept of eschatology. As Emidio Campi has rightly ob-
served: «Wie fast nicht anders zu erwarten, fehlt bei Bullinger jeder fakul-
tative  und  apokalyptische  Zug.  Der  Einbruch  des  Reiches  soll  nicht  ver-
gessen lassen, dass durch die Verkündigung des Wortes die gläubige Existenz
schon dem Eschaton ihrer Vollendung in Gott zu entsprechen beginnt.» 31
However true this characterization of Bullinger as a prototype of an existen-
tialist interpretation of the eschaton may be, there is yet another, more his-
torical line in his eschatology.

For Bullinger the prophetic book of Daniel is largely an account of world
history. Following Jerome 32, he addresses the ancient prophet in the ﬁrst ser-
mon – De vita et opera Danielis – as a «polyhistor», or universal scholar. Bul-
linger uses this title because the prophet «mentions many events, in such a re-
markable way that he gives a coherent exposition of the (cid:1)ρ(cid:3)νικ(cid:7), or the main
points of world history, starting from the Babylonian reign, and recounting
events up to the end of the world». 33

This explains why he publishes his chronological work, the «Epitomen
temporum et rerum ab orbe condito», in one volume with the collected ser-
mons. In addition, Bullinger adds an excursus on the chronology of the 70
year-weeks  after  his  sermons  on  Daniel  9,25–26a. 34  He  admits  that  chro-
nological details have interested him since he was a boy. 35 The historical con-
ceptuality  of  Bullinger’s  thought 36  gives  his  eschatological  portrait  of  the
church a distinct ﬂavor.

According  to  Bullinger’s  concept  of  history,  something  went  seriously

31 Campi, Über das Ende des Weltzeitalters, 235.
32 Cf.  Sancti  Eusebii  Hieronymi  Epistulae,  ed.  Isidorus  Hilberg,  2nd.  rev.  ed.,  Vienna  1996
(Corpus  scriptorum  ecclesiasticorum  Latinorum  54),  461:  «temporum  conscius  et  totius
mundi φιλ(cid:3)(cid:10)στωρ»

33 Daniel  sapientissimus  dei  propheta,  1v:  «nuncupatur  et  recte  quidem  ab  Hieronymo
π(cid:3)λυ(cid:16)σ[τ]ωρ , ut qui multiscius est et multa commemorat, adeoque (cid:1)ρ(cid:3)νικ(cid:7), vel epitome
mundi miriﬁce contexit, incipiens a regno Babylonico et deducens res usque ad ﬁnem mundi’.
Cf. Bullinger, Sermonum Decades quinque, 38: «Ac Daniel recte a vetustis appellatus est po-
lyhistor. Nam quae a suo saeculo ad tempora usque Christi, imo ad extremum usque iudicii
diem ﬁant ac facta sunt in omnibus fere regnis mundi, in populoque dei, tam signiﬁcanter ille
praedixit, ut videri possit historiam contexuisse rerum praeteritarum.»
«Exactior copiosorque supputatio LXX hebdomadum Daniels, et de Interpretationum varie-
tate, Auctarium», in: Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 103v–107r.

34

35 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 104r.
36 Cf. Edward A. Dowey, Heinrich Bullinger as Theologian: Thematic, Comprehensive, Sche-
matic, in: Architect of Reformation: An Introduction to Heinrich Bullinger, 1504–1575, eds.
Bruce Gordon and Emidio Campi, Grand Rapids 2004 (Text and Studies in Reformation and
Post-Reformation Thought), 36.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

91

Daniel Timmerman

wrong in the Christian world after pope Gregory the Great (ob. 604). 37 The
most peaceful cooperation of church and state after emperor Constantine was
disturbed by the papacy. Quite like many of his contemporary Protestant col-
leagues, Bullinger is convinced that the papacy is in fact the eschatological
Antichrist. 38 Although this does not lead to any apocalyptic fever, Bullinger is
convinced that his own century is under greater eschatological tension than
before. «For the last 30 years and even longer, we have seen that the blood of
the martyrs that was shed under the reign of the Antichrist, as if the Lord’s
acre has been enriched with compost». 39 In sermon 52, commenting on Daniel
10, 14 where an angelic messenger says that Daniel’s vision relates to «the last
days», Bullinger states: «The vision concerns the end of times. Therefore it
pertains to us and our own days, and we see that the last part of this vision has
been written for our sake.» 40 The outburst of opposition from the Antichrist
is a clear indication for Bullinger that the end of times are near.

Leaving open the possibility that it is the Turks who are the Antichrist 41,
he gives a dual identiﬁcation of the ﬁnal enemy in the second half of Daniel.
Historically it referred to Antiochus Epiphanes, but in Bullinger’s own time
it is the papacy. This dual identiﬁcation leads to a historical parallelization of
Antiochus and the pope, rather than an apocalyptical apotheosis. Just like
Antiochus once occupied the promised land, the Antichrist lays his hands on
all that is good and righteous:

«He has ruined the truth in this country as well, founded very infectious schools,
condemned the study of sacred literature and the interpretation of the Holy Scrip-
tures, burned pious books, ruined brilliant teachers of the church and men who
were well known for their perseverance in faith, and did not stop persecuting the
people who confessed the doctrine of the gospel.» 42

37 Cf. Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 78v; De origine erroris (1539, cf. HBBibl 1, no 12 ),

76v–77r.

38 For Bullinger’s view on the Antichrist in general, cf. Moser, «Papam esse Antichristum».
39 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 59r: «Postremo vidimus nos iam ab annis 30. et amplius
sanguine martyrum, qui sub Antichristo est effusus, ceu laetamine impinguatum esse agrum
dominicum.»

40 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 115r: «Pertinget enim ad ﬁnem usque saeculi. Unde et ad
nos et nostra tempora pertinebit, videmusque et postremam huius visionis partem propter
nos esse scriptam.»

41 Cf. Bullinger, Comm. 2 Thes 2,3–5: In omnes apostolicas epistolas commentarii (ed. 1582, cf.
HBBibl 1, no 89), 404–411; Comm. 1 John 2,18b: In omnes apostolicas epistolas commenta-
rii, 627. According to Moser, «Papam esse Antichristum», 74, Bullinger’s twofold exegesis of
the Antichrist as both Islam and the papacy was inspired by Oecolampadius.

42 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 93r: «Caeterum veritatem adﬂigit et hic in terram, scholas
instituit corruptissimas, linguas sacras et interpretationes sacrorum librorum doctrinamque
synceram damnat, libros pios comburit, stellas denique, illustres in ecclesia doctores et viros
claros in ﬁde conculcatos perdit, et populum conﬁtentem doctrinam evangelicam persequi
non desinit».

92

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

This parallelism is most fully developed in the discussion of Daniel 11. The
«contemptible person» (verse 21) is either Antiochus or the papacy. How-
ever, in line with Jerome 43, Bullinger reads the end of Daniel 11 (from verse
36 onwards) as an exclusive reference to the eschatological Antichrist. A dis-
cussion of twelve notae antichristi serves to support his conclusion that the
prophecy of Daniel is being fulﬁlled in the Roman papacy. The bishop of
Rome has removed the doctrine of the sufﬁciency of Christ’s sacriﬁce by a
doctrine of a real and expiatory sacriﬁce in the mass. The inquisition burns
books, and tortures those who are found to be in possession of a New Testa-
ment. 44

Although this identiﬁcation of the papacy with the Antichrist could easily
lead to the expectation of the imminent consummation of the world in an
apocalyptic judgment, Bullinger’s historical approach rather seems to sug-
gest that the fulﬁllment of Daniel’s prophecies is taking place in a process
lasting centuries. At the same time, he is convinced that the development of
the papacy as the Antichrist marks a deﬁnitive point in history. 45 This makes
his eschatology both highly imminent as well as rather timeless. Even the
highly actual reference to the eschatological Antichrist is embedded in a gen-
eral characterization of the state of Christianity over the last centuries up
until Bullinger’s own days. Yet history has a ﬁnal destination: the moment
that God will sit in judgment over the world. When God has completed the
number of the elect, he will bring the persecution of the church to an end. Be-
lievers should resist curious questions and wait patiently for the completion
of history. 46

4. The nature of the church

Bullinger’s most explicit description of the nature of the church can be found
in his sermons on Daniel 2 – Nebuchadnezzar’s dream. The key for his inter-
pretation of this chapter is his fundamental distinction between earthly kings
and rulers, and the reign of Christ. Although all kingdoms are ordered and

43 Cf. Jerome, Comm. Dn 11,36–39: Commentariorum in Danielem libri III ‹IV›, ed. Franciscus

Glorie, Turnhout 1964 (Corpus Christianum Series Latina 75a), 925–928.

44 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 127v.
45 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 129v: «Ita minime agnoscitur hodie antichristus, tametsi
constet prophetias de illo omnes esse adimpletas, et adimpleri quotidie, constet denique si
alius venturus sit antichristus, hoc tamen praesente turpiorem esse non posse.»

46 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 137r–v: «Videtur autem haec admonitio omnes ﬁdeles
hortari ad patientiam, ut relictis quaestionibus curiosis omnibus in ﬁde et patientia persever-
antes, cogitent non de tempore et articulis temporum, sed de cruce fortiter ferenda, et mundo
atque antichristo vincendo tantisper dum liberator et redemptor e coelis veniat»; cf. 58r; 133v.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

93

Daniel Timmerman

governed by God, only the kingdom of Christ is eternal. 47 Sermon 11 is a dis-
cussion of the «rock cut out of a mountain, but not by human hands» (Daniel
2, 45). For Bullinger it is clear that this rock must be a reference to Christ, in
line with the interpretation of the stone in Isaiah 28,16 in the New Testament
(e.g. Matthew 16,18 and 1 Peter 2,6). That the rock was cut out of a mountain
refers to both the two natures of Christ – the mountain symbolizing both
heaven and the people of God – and to the reign of Christ. This mountain
«became huge and ﬁlled the whole earth» (verse 35), since Christ has estab-
lished a large kingdom throughout the entire world. Referring to Zion as the
place where, according to Isaiah 2,2–3, all nations will gather, he identiﬁes
the kingdom of Christ with the church which is «being expanded throughout
the  entire  world,  so  that  she  is  not  ﬁxed  or  conﬁned  to  any  particular
place». 48 After identifying the reign of Christ with the church he makes an
important distinction:

«Although it is one and the same, yet the kingdom of Christ is called the kingdom
of grace on earth, and the kingdom of glory in heaven. The kingdom of Christ is
present in this age, as that church of Christ that relies on God’s grace and is being
preserved through the practice of humility and piety, for as long as she lives in this
age. Christ reigns in them [sc. true believers] by his Spirit and Word.» 49

The kingdom of glory is, of course, the eternal heavenly bliss of the faithful.
Both kingdoms, on earth and in heaven, are established by God for the elect
believers and cannot be destroyed by human power. Even the church mili-
tant, afﬂicted as she may be, can never be ruined. The Lord will preserve a
pure church for himself amidst the furies and blasphemies of this world, just
like it was in the days of Elijah (cf. 1 Kings 19). 50

The church as we see her is a church at war, but for Bullinger this militant
character of the church is not accidental. Since God governs the earth and
guides the faithful, hardships and internal strife are part and parcel of his
providential preparation of the church for the ﬁnal battle. «The end of all
things will not come, before the army – that is, the church of the faithful – is
prepared for battle against Satan, the world and the Antichrist, and is ﬁrst
rightly and harshly broken, harassed and humbled.» 51 The history of the re-

47 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 10r; 17r–v.
48 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 21r: «Caeterum ecclesia regnum est Christi: ecclesia illa

per universum terrarum orbem expanditur, nec ulli est afﬁxa aut conclusa loco.»

49 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 21r: «Recte enim dicitur Regnum Christi, etsi unum et
idem sit, dici tamen et Gratiae in terris et Gloriae in coelo. Gratiae est in praesenti saeculo,
ipsa Christi ecclesia, gratia Dei subnixa et conservata, donec vivit in hoc seculo, in humilitate
et pietatis exercitio. Regnat in his Christus per spiritum et verbum.»

50 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 21r.
51 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 137r: «Non venturum ﬁnem rerum omnium, nisi exerci-
tus, id est ecclesia ﬁdelium, instructa ad pugnam contra sathanam mundum atque antichris-

94

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

building  of  the  temple  in  the  days  of  Nehemiah  offers  Bullinger  a  good
example of the continuous struggle of the church. He calls it «an example
(typus) of the church of Christ, that cannot be built up in this age without a
thousand  hazards  and  incessant  harshness  and  labor.»  Therefore,  «if  the
storm  of  suffering  arises,  we  should  consider  that  this  is  the  normal  situ-
ation for God and the church, and persist in the unity and the truth of the
church and never fall back from the Christian truth into the impious world
because of these tribulations.» 52 Although the world sometimes rightfully
seems to claim the victory, «the world always perishes, the church will last
forever». 53

Within Bullinger’s image of the people of God there is no room for con-
temporary Judaism. 54 Quite remarkably in the light of his well-known con-
cept of covenantal unity 55, in sermon 50 he expresses the view that God has
abolished  the  old  covenant  and  established  a  new  one,  conﬁrmed  by  the
blood of his Son. The Jews should not hope for a religious or political resto-
ration, because their desolation is eternal. His discussion of Judaism urges
him to warn his audience not to follow the example of the Jews. 56

5. The central message of consolation and admonition

In the ﬁrst sermon, Bullinger rejects the opinion of those who argue that
there is no room for preaching the prophetic books of the Old Testament in
the church of Christ. In contrast, the Zurich church leader ﬁnds it very use-
ful to explain the prophecies of Daniel for the Christian community. In the
ﬁrst place, because it illuminates the reign of Christ, and shows that the king-
doms of the world are vain and vulnerable. In the second place, the book of

tum, probe et saevissimis prius modis fuerit afﬂicta lacerata et contrita, adeoque nisi ecclesia
prius fuerit in plurimas dissecta factiones, haereticorum utique, Iudaeorum, Gentium, Mahu-
metanorum, et Romanistarum.»

52 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 102r–v: «Praetulerunt haec typum ecclesiae Christi, quae
non nisi per mille discrimina, et per labores durissimos perpetuosque in hoc saeculo extruitur.
[. . .] Utile est autem horum meminisse frequenter, ut dum tempestas afﬂictionum oboritur in
ecclesia,  cogitemus  hunc  esse  Dei  et  ecclesiae  morem,  ideoque  in  omnibus  calamitatibus
perseveremus in unitate et veritate ecclesiae, et nuspiam propter tribulationes deﬁciamus a
veritate Christiana ad impium mundum.»

53 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 75r: «adeoque semper perit mundus, permanet ecclesia».
54 Cf. Achim Detmers, «Sie nennen unseren Retter Christus einen Hurensohn und die göttliche
Jungfrau eine Dirne»: Heinrich Bullingers Gutachten zur Duldung von Juden 1572, in: Die
Zürcher Reformation: Ausstrahlungen und Rückwirkungen, eds. Alfred Schindler and Hans
Stickelberger, Bern 2001 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 18), 229–259.

55 E.g. De testamento seu foedere Dei unico et aeterno (cf. HBBibl 1, no 54), 28r–34v.
56 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 108r–111r.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

95

Daniel Timmerman

Daniel should be explained for the ‹people of God›, because true believers
«will be comforted in their miseries and misfortunes, and the depressed souls
of the pious will be encouraged» by it. 57 Although this is not a formal de-
scription of the argumentum of the book of Daniel, the other 65 sermons
conﬁrm that for Bullinger, the consolation and admonition of the church is
the main scopus of these Old Testament prophecies.

In  a  direct  address  to  his  audience,  Bullinger  remarks  that  the  Holy
Spirit does not merely inform the church about events in the time of Anti-
ochus the Great. We could learn this from Livy or any other historian as
well.  The  Spirit’s  true  purpose  is  that  God’s  afﬂicted  people  will  be  in-
structed amidst all turmoil and will receive consolation from the fact that
God  clearly  guides  all  things  and  shows  special  care  for  his  church.  Bul-
linger concludes: «We should observe this as the sole scope of this proph-
ecy or vision, like I have often summoned you to do.» 58 The fact that God
guides history should comfort the church when she is suffering from op-
pression or persecution. If God wants to build and comfort his oppressed
church, he will not be destitute of the wisdom and power to do so. 59 Bul-
linger ﬁnds a message of consolation in almost every element of the visions
of Daniel. The deepest consolation is Christ himself, «who has always been
a refuge, and still is a refuge for all who are afﬂicted. In him one ﬁnds the
greatest comfort. Without him nothing is safe, and there is no true conso-
lation». 60

When the church is ﬂourishing and does not have to fear opposition from
the Antichrist, the visions of Daniel are an admonition to be prepared and
not to marvel when persecution does arise. For example, in Daniel 7,8 we
ﬁnd a description of a terrifying, frightening and very powerful animal, with
a small horn on its head that speaks boastfully – according to Bullinger a
clear reference to the Antichrist that is the papacy. He remarks:

«The prophets tells us all these things – which we must constantly repeat like the
single scope of everything [in these prophecies] – so that we may be forewarned by
God and are not captured by astonishment because of the power and fortune of
this kingdom. We should not lose our faith in Christ and his holy gospel, discour-

57 Daniel  sapientissimus  dei  propheta,  1v:  «Atqui  Daniel  Christi  regnum  praedicat  et  ornat,
regna vero mundi vana atque caduca esse ostendit. Rursus praedicanda sunt populo Dei, quae
ﬁdem veram fovent, consolantur in casibus tristibus, et erigunt animos piorum depressos.»
58 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 121r: «Unde vult colligi Deum etiam sua auxilia in per-
turbatissimis illis temporibus non negaturum afﬂictis. Sed de hoc huius vaticinii aut visionis
scopo unice observando, iam saepe admonuimus.»

59 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 23r.
60 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 99v: «Et Christus a seculo fuit asylum, sicut et hodie est
asylum  omnium  afﬂictorum.  In  eo  invenitur  plenissima  consolatio.  Extra  hunc  nihil  est
tutum, nulla consolatio ﬁrma.»

96

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

aged by persecutions, miseries and the incessant cross, but rather we should call
upon God, the ruler of all kingdoms, and invincibly persist in the confession of the
truth of the gospel, bravely resist the Antichrist and his reign, and expect the day
of redemption and the restoration of all things.» 61

This implicit formulation of the scopus of Daniel’s prophecies in sermon 37
betrays one of Bullinger’s main concerns: the consolidation of Protestantism,
perhaps  in  the  face  of  resurgent  Catholicism  in  the  aftermath  of  the  ﬁrst
session of the Council of Trent. He is writing for an audience that has ac-
cepted the message of Protestantism, but may be in danger of losing faith
(deﬁciamus). Therefore, the book of Daniel is not only a consolation for be-
lievers under persecution, but also an admonition to persist and resist (per-
stemus,  pugnemus). 62  They  should  prepare  themselves  for  the  imminent
temptations, hardships and persecutions. 63

6. The function of prophetic revelation

In his study of the «Decades», Peter Opitz has argued that Bullinger’s ec-
clesiology was built around the central principle of solus Christus audiendus,
«so dass die Kirche dem von sich aus redenden Christus gegenübersteht als
ihm  gegenüber  verantwortliche  Hörgemeinschaft.» 64  In  the  eschatological
situation of persecution and temptation, the church needs the consolation
and exhortation of God’s word. This leads to the ﬁfth aspect of Bullinger’s
image of the church in the sermons on Daniel: the function of prophetic rev-
elation.

In the title of the sermons Daniel is introduced as a most wise prophet
(Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta), as if Bullinger follows the opinion of
modern scholarship that the ﬁrst chapters of Daniel contain elements from
the tradition of wisdom literature. In his ﬁrst homily on Daniel 2 he develops

61 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 78v: «Et haec quidem omnia recitantur nobis a propheta
(qui sane velut unicus scopus omnium subinde est repetendus) ut praemoniti a Deo, non ca-
piamur admiratione potentiae felicitatisque huius regni, fractique persequutionibus miseriis
et cruce assidua, deﬁciamus a Christo, et sancto eius evangelio, sed invocantes Deum omnium
regnorum gubernatorem, invicti perstemus in confessione veritatis evangelicae, fortiterque
pugnemus contra Antichristum et regnum eius, expectantes diem illam redemptionis et resti-
tutionis omnium.»

62 Cf. Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 30v: «constanter perstare in confessione syncerae ve-

ritatis»; 49v: «constanter perseverare in vera religione».

63 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 138r: «ut omnes pii, qui inciderint in illa tempora, animos
suos praeparent ad futuros tentationes, offensiones et persequutiones vel vitandas vel supe-
randas»; cf. 49r; 61r.

64 Opitz, Bullinger als Theologe, 425.

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

97

Daniel Timmerman

the antithesis of true and false wisdom as a major hermeneutical principle.
The false wisdom of the Babylonian magi is paralleled by the human philos-
ophy of the doctors and masters of the papacy. They lack true wisdom be-
cause they do not partake in divine illumination. In the second sermon on
Daniel 2 that true wisdom comes from God and is not the result of human ef-
forts but can be received through prayer. Although Bullinger does not deny
the relevance of dreams and the revelation of hidden secrets, it is most im-
portant that believers should ask for «faith and true knowledge of God and
his Christ». From the other sermons on Daniel 2 we learn that God has re-
vealed the mystery of salvation in the gospel for the sake of the church. 65 The
church lives by the word of God, as it is mediated by the prophet. In Bulling-
er’s  days,  the  authority  of  the  prophet  has  been  taken  over  by  the  Scrip-
tures. 66 Therefore, in an implicit refutation of Tridentine theology, Bullinger
clearly denies that the authority of Scripture is dubious without approbation
by the church. 67

The content of this divine wisdom can be summarized with the dual ter-
minology  of  prophetic  promise  and  historical  fulﬁlment.  The  visions  in
chapters 10–12 are in their entirety «a prophetic forecast and a summary of
historical events» from which believers can learn in retrospect the trustwor-
thiness of the Scriptures. 68 Bullinger never gets tired of pointing to the cer-
tainty and reliability of God’s promises. 69 Anticipating a doctrine of verbal
inspiration,  Bullinger  states  that  the  prophets  could  never  predict  future
events with such great evidence, if the Holy Spirit had not driven both their
minds and their pens. 70 The certainty of the divine promises appears clearly
from their fulﬁlment in the course of history, for which he ﬁnds ample evi-
dence in the work of secular historians. 71 As a historian Bullinger is eager to
point to the fulﬁlment of Daniel’s prophecies in the era of Antiochus, Jesus,
or in his own days.

Yet it is not only the historian’s duty to testify to God’s work in history.
Nebuchadnezzar’s  acknowledgement  of  Daniel’s  divine  inspiration  brings

65 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 17r: «Ergo propter Ecclesiam revelatur veritas, et quidem

a solo Deo, non ab ulla carne».

66 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 74r.
67 Daniel  sapientissimus  dei  propheta,  136r:  «Videant  ergo  quid  cornicentur,  qui  disputant

scripturas citra ecclesiae approbationem esse dubias aut authoritatis dubiae.»

68 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 111v: «Est haec prognosticon propheticum et compen-

dium historicum earum rerum, quas operae precium erat scire ecclesiam.»

69 E.g. Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 19v; 87v; 92r; 94r; 122v; 136r.
70 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 19v: «Nisi enim spiritus Dei impulisset et animum et sti-

lum prophetarum, nunquam potuissent tanta evidentia, praedicare futura.»

71 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 87v, referring to the histories of Orosius: «Quae quidem
modis omnibus congruens cum vaticinio simplex et syncera expositio, conﬁrmat nobis oracu-
lorum vel verbi Dei veritatem atque certitudinem»; cf. 117v.

98

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

Bullinger to the remark that many kings, like David, Salomon and several
Christian emperors, were «preachers of God’s works and God’s word». He
even  calls  Nebuchadnezzar  a doctor  ecclesiae.  If  these  kings  were  in  fact
preachers, why would the church’s prelates feel ashamed to do what they
did – to preach? 72 Although Bullinger might have hoped to inspire the gov-
ernment of Zurich with these biblical and historical examples, there is no
doubt that his main interest is to promote the preaching ofﬁce of the Re-
formed ministers.

The appearance of angels in the book of Daniel occasions Bullinger to dis-
cuss the ministry of angels or men in the process of salvation and revelation.
God uses the ministry of creatures more often than not. 73 Although angels,
judges, apostles and teachers of the church are sometimes called ‹saviours›, it
is in fact God who saves trough the ministry of his servants. 74 For Bullinger
the importance of the ministry of men – rather than angels – is clear. His own
century  faced  the  cruel  and  horrible  rage  of  the  Antichrist,  but  God  sent
many faithful and excellent teachers (doctores) to his church. «I will not give
a list of their names, it is obvious for anyone who reads the histories of the
past seventy or eighty years». 75

Bullinger clearly holds the preaching ofﬁce, or at least certain contempor-
ary preachers, in high esteem. Preachers of the word imitate the angels in
their  own,  limited  measure. 76  The  ministry  of  God’s  word  is  an  essential
function  for  Christianity.  Commenting  on  Daniel’s  interpretation  of  Ne-
buchadnezzar’s dream, he remarks that God did not only give the Scripture
to the world, but also «at all times suitable interpreters, who could adapt the
Scripture for the salvation of their audience, with consideration of person,
place, time and content.» 77 Just like Daniel himself, who needed an angel to
interpret the vision of the four great beasts (cf. Daniel 7,16), the church in
Bullinger’s age needs interpreters to understand the meaning of the «divine
oracles». In fact, she needs a twofold interpretation through the inner illumi-
nation  of  God’s  Spirit  and  the  outer  explanation  of  the  Word  by  faithful
teachers. «Let us therefore be aware lest we by our corrupted disposition

72 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 38r.
73 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 34r; 39v; 98r.
74 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 33v–34r.
75 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 128v: «Porro universo illo tempore quo saeviit truculen-
ter et horribiliter in ecclesia Antichristus, non desiit bonitas Dei excitare ac mittere ecclesiae
suae ﬁdeles atque praeclaros doctores. Horum catalogum hic non contexam, obuius est legen-
tibus historias, iam inde a septingentis et octingentis annis.»

76 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 113r.
77 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 41r: «Ita vero universo terrarum orbi Deus benignus pater
scripturam dedit sanctam. Ei etiam adiungit omnibus aetatibus idoneos interpretes, qui pro ra-
tione personarum, locorum, temporum, et rerum illam applicent ad salutem auditorum.»

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

99

Daniel Timmerman

may  block  the  road  for  sound  doctors  and  faithful  interpreters  who  have
been sent to us by God» 78.

Finally, the church in the eschaton needs the study of the sacred Scrip-
tures. In sermon 65 Bullinger remarks that the study of holy writ contains
the promise of an abundant knowledge of things concerning the end times. 79
At this point the visionary and apocalyptic revelation in the book of Daniel is
subjected to a remarkable metamorphosis. For Bullinger the proper heir of
the prophetic ﬁgure of Daniel is the student of the sacred languages, Hebrew,
Greek  and  Latin,  and  theology.  As  Anja-Silvia  Göing  has  shown  in  her
analysis of the sermons on Daniel 1, the didactic-pedagogical interpretation
of prophetic wisdom is a distinct feature of Bullinger’s exegesis. 80 He relates
the interpretation of apocalyptic visions by Daniel, the sapientissimus Dei
propheta, to the needs and demands of the Reformed church in his own time.
This is where eschatology meets ecclesiology.

6. Evaluation

Bullinger’s ecclesiology is fraught with eschatological tension. The church is
part of the heavenly reign of Christ, and yet subjected to oppression and
temptations in this age. She boldly denounces the Antichrist, the papacy, but
yet feels the need to prepare herself against possible persecution and oppres-
sion. She is solely dependent on the Word of God, and yet being actively
built up by the ministry of men. Yet this tension very much resembles the
situation  of  the  faith  community  in  which  the  book  of  Daniel  was  ﬁrst
handed over and written down.

According to Bullinger, the central message of Daniel was to comfort and
exhort the people of God, the church of all ages. For Bullinger the effective-
ness of this message depended on the evidence for the fulﬁllment of God’s
promises in the past, which gives his interpretation a distinct historical ﬂavor.
At the same time, his sermons are ﬁrmly rooted in the contemporary setting
of the sixteenth-century faith community as a community of hearers – of
both  his  audience  in  Zurich  and  of  the  larger  readership  of  the  printed

78 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 84r: «Caveamus ergo ne corruptis affectionibus nostris,
praecludamus viam venientibus ad nos sanis doctoribus ﬁdelibus interpretibus, a Deo ad nos
missis.»

79 Daniel sapientissimus dei propheta, 138v: «Promittunt haec studiosis sacrarum literarum et
suae salutis non negligentibus, cognitionem harum rerum, scitu videlicet necessariarum, de
rebus ultimi saeculi abundantem, adeoque ostenditur pios ultimi saeculi futuros sacrarum li-
terarum studiosissimos, diligentesque in propaganda scientia sana syncerae religionis, et quae
sunt de ﬁne saeculi».

80 Göing, Schulausbildung, 457.

100

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

«The world always perishes, the church will last forever»

homilies – because he is able to translate and expand the meaning of Daniel’s
visions in such a way that they become highly relevant for those who are
facing  the  ﬁre  of  persecution  or  –  as  might  have  been  the  case  for  many
among Bullinger’s audience – for those who are in danger of extinguishing
the ﬁres of their enthusiasm for the gospel.

Daniel Timmerman, Theologische Universiteit Apeldoorn

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

101

Daniel Timmerman

102

Zwingliana XXXVI, 2009

