Z W I N G L I A NA 

BEITRÄGE  ZUR  G E S C H I C H TE  ZWINGLIS 

DER  REFORMATION  U ND  DES  PROTESTANTISMUS 

IN  DER  S C H W E IZ 

HERAUSGEGEBEN  VOM  ZWINGLIVEREIN 

1988/1 

BAND  XVII/HEFT  5 

Brothers  and  Neighbors: 

The  Language  of  Community  in  Zwingli's  Preaching 

by  LEE  PALMER  WANDEL 

In  the  early sixteenth  Century, the  central  themes  of  the  reform  were  spread  not 
through  the  printed  word  alone, but  through  the  personal presence  of  dozens of 
preachers  throughout  the  Germanies  and  Switzerland  -  through  the  face-to-
face  contact  of  reformers  with  local  communities.1  These  preachers  shared  cer-
tain  key  ideas  -  the  exclusive  authority  of  Scripture,  the  primacy  of  faith,  the 
unconditionality  of  grace -  but  each  also gave to  the  message  of  reform  a  more 
personal  and  distinctive  stamp.  Each  preached  that  message  in  language  which 
was  accessible,  immediate,  and  meaningful  within  local  contexts. 

For these  reformers,  Scripture was the  source not  only for their  theology,  but 
also for  a new program  of  Christianity  lived, of  Christian  practice. In  the  text of 
Matthew  22 :39, "You  should  love  your  neighbor  as yourself",  many  found  the 
new  law of  Christ, which  could  serve  as  the  basis  for  a renewed  Christian  Com(cid:173)
munity.  Throughout  southwest  Germany  and  Switzerland,  Martin  Bucer  in 
Strasbourg,  Eberlin  von  Gunzburg  in  Augsburg,  Huldrych  Zwingli  in  Zürich, 
and  Oecolampad  in  Basel were preaching  that  love of neighbor, Christian  broth-
erly  love, would  make  possible  the  reshaping  of  all forms  of  human  association 
in  accordance  with  divine  law.2 

1  On the impact of preaching, see for example, Robert Scribner, Practice and Principle in 

the German Towns: preachers and people, in: Reformation  Principle and Practice: Es(cid:173)
says in  Honor of A.G. Dickens, ed. P.N.  Brooks, London  1980, 95-117. 

2  See, for  example, Bucer,  Das ym selbs niemant  sonder andern  leben  soll (Strassburg, 
1523);  Eberlin, Ein  schöner  Spiegel  eins  Christlichen  lebens  (1524);  Oecolampad, 
Zwen schon Sermon: inhaltende das man von wegen des herren  Nachtmals Bruderli(cid:173)
che liebe nitt soll zertrennen (o.O., o.J.). 

361 

A  notion  of  brotherly  love  has  been  recognized  by  historians  as  a  central 
theme  in  Reformation  preaching.  Bernd  Moeller found  in  it the  ancient  ideal of 
German  communitas  -  medieval  corporatism  -  which  fused  the  Corporation  of 
the  town  with  the  corpus  of  Christian  believers.3  More  recently,  Peter  Blickle 
has  argued  that  the  south  German  reformers  preached  a  notion  of  brotherly 
love  that  was  appropriated  by  the  peasants  and  artisans  as  the  model  for  their 
egalitarian  Community  in  the  revolution  of  1525 -  a model  that  those  preachers 
then  rejected  in horror.4  He  condemns  the  reformers, and  in particular  Zwingli, 
for  failing  to  see  or  pursue  the  implications  of  their  use  of  those  terms  that 
evoked  powerful  populär  ideals. 

Yet  the  language  of  brotherly  love  had  many  connotations  in  the  early  six-
teenth  Century. An  ideal  of  brotherhood  -  Christian  brotherhood  -  was  the  de-
fining  principle  in  a number  of  late  medieval  forms  of  association:  the  monas-
tery, the  guild, the  confraternity  -  forms  of  association  which  were  not  identical 
in  structure,  membership,  or  purposes.3  The  language  of  brotherly  love  pro-
vided  patterns  for  human  relations  based  on  an  ancient  and  primary  familial 
bond  -  the  most  egalitarian  of  familial  bonds  -  patterns  that  allowed  for  certain 
kinds  of  differences  and  not  others.6  By  the  1520's,  the  language  of  brotherly 
love also provided  the  terms  and  the  values  for widespread  attacks on  tithes  and 
alms,  or  rather  on  their  abuse,  on  the  tyranny  of  the  priests,  and  on  the  hier-
archy  of  papal  and  imperial  authority.7 

3  See especially Bernd Moeller,  Imperial Cities and the  Reformation, in: Imperial Cities 

and the  Reformation,  Philadelphia  1972, 41-115. 

4  Blickle, originally made this argument  in: Die Revolution  von  1525, Munich/Vienna 

1977;  translated  Brady  & Midelfort,  Baltimore  1981, and  has  continued  it  in: Ge(cid:173)
meinde-Reformation.  Die  Menschen  des  16. Jahrhunderts  auf  dem  Weg  zum  Heil, 
Munich  1985. 

5  On the notions of brotherhood in medieval associations, see Pierre Michaud-Quantin, 
Universitas, Paris 1970; on guilds, Antony Black, Guilds and Civil Society in European 
Political Thought  from  the Twelfth  Century  to the  Present,  London  1984;  Otto  Ger(cid:173)
hard Oexle,  Die mittelalterlichen  Gilden: Ihre Selbstdeutung und ihr Beitrag zur For(cid:173)
mung sozialer  Strukturen,  in: Soziale  Ordnungen  im  Selbstverständnis  des  Mittelal(cid:173)
ters, vol. 12, 1, ed. Albert Zimmermann, Berlin  1979, 203-226; on confraternities, see 
esp. Pierre Duparc, Confraternities  of the Holy Spirit and Village Communities in the 
Middle  Ages,  in:  Lordship  and  Community  in  Medieval  Europe,  ed.  Frederic 
Cheyette,  Huntington,  NY  1975, 341-56;  most  recently,  Ronald  Weissman,  Ritual 
Brotherhood  in  Renaissance  Florence, New York 1985. 

6  Michael Clanchy has delineated  the use of  the language  of brotherly love in late me(cid:173)
dieval legal transactions and its function  in reaffirming  ties of Community as well as fi-
nancial obligations, "Law and Love in the Middle Ages", in: Disputes and Settlements, 
Law and  Human  Relations in  the West, ed. John  Bossy, Cambridge  1983, 47-67. 
7  Although the Twelve Articles only refer to brotherly love once, many of the more po(cid:173)
pulär pamphlets place a notion of brotherly love at the center of their call for  reform. 
See,  for  example, Johannes  Boschenstein,  Ain  Christlicher  Vnderricht  der  Bruederli-
chen  lieb (1524);  Otto Brunfelss, Von  dem  Pfaffen  Zehenden  (o.O.o.J.); Hans Ritter, 

362 

The language  of brotherly  love was employed  by a number  of reformers  who, 
in  the  end, articulated  a ränge  of  visions  of  the  Christian  reformed  Community, 
from  the  egalitarian  artisanal  vision  of  Balthasar  Stanberger  or  the  Anabaptists, 
through  Bucer  and  Zwingli's  civic  Christian  communites,  to  Luther's  endorse-
ment  of  the  hierarchical  Saxon  arrangement  of  princes  and  magnates.  In  one 
way, this language  can be said  to  represent  the  juncture  from  which  the  reform(cid:173)
ers  diverged  as  they  pursued  differing  visions  of  Christian  society.  It  is  also  a 
bridge, linking  the  reformers'  formal  theology  with  more  broadly  based  notions 
of  community,  with  certain  ideals  of  behavior  for  collective  life. 

In  this  essay,  I would  like  to  explore  some  of  the  sources  for  Zwingli's  lan(cid:173)
guage  of  brotherly  love,  how  he  drew  upon  them  and  how  he  transformed 
them.  Zwingli  is  a  good  place  to  Start  in  an  exploration  of  the  language  of 
brotherly  love  because  it was  his vision  of  a Christian  community  -  more  than 
Luther's -  that was reflected  in  the  preaching  of  Bucer  in  Strasbourg,  Eberlin  in 
Augsburg,  Oecolampad  in  Basel, as well  as  in  the  pamphlets  of  populär  propa-
gandists  such  as  Utz  Eckstein,  Balthasar  Stanberger,  and  Johannes  Boschen-
stein.8  Like  these  other  reformers,  Zwingli  was  directly  engaged  with  a  civic 
community  in  reforming  the  Christian  community.9  In  looking at Zwingli's  use 
of  the  language  of  brotherly  love we  may  begin  to  understand  the  relationship 
between  reformation  preaching  and  populär  notions  of  community. 

Zwingli  employed  the  language  of  an  ancient  text,  Matthew  22:39  -  to  love 
one's  neighbor  as oneself  -  language  that  had  been  applied  over  time  to  a wide 
ränge  of  situations. This  particular  text  provided  not  only an  ideal  of  social  rela-
tions, but  also a language  to  describe  and  give value  to  those  relations.  Its  mes-
sage  was  articulated  in  terms  -  words  -  that  were  multivalent:  love,  neighbor, 
seif. What  did  it mean  to  love  one's  seif  in  sixteenth  Century  Zürich? What  did 
"neighbor"  signify  in  Zürich?  Was  it  a  compelling  bond  for  Zwingli? 

I  would  like  to  suggest  another  explanation  for  the  disjucture  between 
Zwingli's  use of the  language  of brotherly  love and, on  the  one  hand, that  of  the 
peasants  of  1525, and, on  the  other,  that  of  Luther.  This  explanation  can  be  no 
more  than  tentative, a  first  effort  to  enter  into  particularly  multivalent  and  sig-

Welcher gern wissen will//von armutz nott und ungefell (1525); Balthasar Stanberger, 
Ein Dialogus... zwischen einem Prior/Leyenbruder un Bettler (o.O.o.J.). The scholar-
ship on these attacks is extensive. On the connection between notions of community 
and attacks on the church's economic exactions, in addition to Blickle, see especially, 
Henry J.Cohn, Anticlericalism  in  the  German  Peasants' War  1525, in: Past and Pre-
sent 83 (1979), 3-31. For Zürich, still the most extensive treatment  is  Walter Ciaas(cid:173)
sen, Schweizer Bauernpolitik im Zeitalter Zwingiis (Sozialgeschichtliche  Forschungen 
4), Berlin  1899. 
In addition to Boschenstein  and  Stanberger, given above, see  Eckstein,  Dialogus (Zü(cid:173)
rich,  1525) and  Klag des Gloubens (Zürich, ?1525). 

9  See,  especially,  Hans-Christoph  Rublack, Zwingli  und  Zürich,  in:  Zwingliana  16 

8 

(1985/1), 393-426. 

363 

nificant  vocabulary,  to  explore  that  language  in  the  preaching  and  writing  of 
Zwingli.  I would  like  to  suggest  that  Zwingli's  use  of  the  language  of  brotherly 
love  did  not  denote  the  same  values  and  associations  as  Luther  preached  or  as 
the  artisans and  peasants  of  1525 embraced.  Zwingli's  use was circumscribed  by 
the  series  of  contexts  in  which  he  placed  that  language:  immediate  issues  and 
experiences within  collective life  in Zürich; the  contours  of his theology; and is(cid:173)
sues  under  debate  in  many  south  German  towns  about  the  nature  and  form  of 
the  Christian  Community. 

Let us first  turn  to the  collective  life  of  Zürich.  How would  brotherly  love  be 
defined  within  the  town  of  Zürich? The  medieval  forms  of  association  that  em-
ployed  that  language  -  monasteries,  confraternities,  and  guilds  -  were  all  pre-
sent  in the  life  of  the  town.10 That  Zwingli, Leo Jud, and  other reformers  in  Zü(cid:173)
rich  did  not  address their  efforts  to the  monastic  houses  in  Zürich  suggests  how 
very much  the  influence  of the  Dominican,  Franciscan, and Augustinian  houses 
had  waned.11  All  were  dissolved  in  the  years  1523-24.12  Confraternities,  of 
which  there were  13 when  they were dissolved  in  1525,13 were more  populated, 
but  they,  too, were  relatively  silent  in  the  life  of  the  town.14 

Guilds, on the  other  hand, were the  dominant  form  of association  within  Zü(cid:173)
rich  collective  life.15  Not only did they  determine  economic  policy and  practice, 
from  fishing  rights  to  the  kinds  of  cloth  the  town  would  produce  to  the  foreign 
markets  where  the  town  could  trade.16  For  the  laity  they  also  were  the  sole 
access to political  life: membership  in a guild  was a prerequisite  to  participation 
in  the  town  Council.17  It  was  through  the  guilds  that  the  laity  entered  into  the 
religious  life  of  the  town:  not  only  did  guilds  Sponsor  processions  and  provide 
endowments  for  the  construction  and  maintenance  of  altars, stained  glass Win(cid:173)
dows  and  belltowers,18  but  all  the  confraternities  in  Zürich  were  linked  to  the 

10  Rudolf Pfister,  Kirchengeschichte  der  Schweiz, vol.  I, Zürich  1964, beginning  with 

Section II. 

11  The populations  of all religious houses  had declined  substantially  by 1520. 
12  Emil Egli, Actensammlung  zur  Geschichte  der  Zürcher  Reformation  in  den Jahren 
1519-1533, Zürich  1879; Nieuwkoop  1973, (hereafter  AZürcherRef,  nos. 426, 595, 
and 598-99. See also, Paul Schweizer, «Die Behandlung der zürcherischen  Klostergü(cid:173)
ter  in  der  Reformationszeit»,  in: Theologische  Zeitschrift  aus  der  Schweiz,  Zürich, 
1885. 

13  AZürcherRef  no. 620. 
14  With  the  exception  of  the  actual  dissolution  of  the  confraternities,  Egli's collection 
contains no references  to them, and  I have not yet found  record of their activities in 
the  Staatsarchiv. 

15  For the  description  of  the  guilds  that  follows,  see  Hans Morfi Zunftverfassung  und 
Obrigkeit in Zürich von Waldmann bis Zwingli, Zürich  1969; and  Walter Jacob, Poli(cid:173)
tische  Führungsschicht  und  Reformation,  Zürich  1970,  1-38. 

16  Staatsarchiv Zürich  [hereafter  StAZ], A  73: Zunftwesen. 
17  Morf (Anm. 15). 
18  StAZ, A  73, 1-2:  Zunftwesen;  A  77: Verschiedene  Handwerke. 

364 

guilds.19  And  finally,  guild  membership  provided  a  framework  for  the  social 
stratification  of the  town: membership  in a powerful  guild such  as the  Saffran  or 
Weggen  brought  prestige  and  Status to  most, if not  all members, while  only  the 
most  influential  member  of  the  lesser  guilds  had  access  to  decision-making  in 
the  town.20 

It  is  important  to  keep  this  last  role  of  the  guilds  in  mind  when  discussing 
notions  of  brotherly  love. The  guilds  in  Zürich  stratified:  both  their  member(cid:173)
ship  into  ranks  of  masters, journeymen,  wage  laborers, and  widows;21  and  their 
towns,  according  to  the  relative  Status  and  influence  of  different  guilds.22  The 
language  of  brotherly  love  did  not  reflect  egalitarian  relations  within  the 
guilds.23  Rather,  as  Antony  Black  has  suggested,  the  language  served  to  articu-
late  a  brotherhood  in  which  there  were  no  fathers  or  mothers,  but  in  which 
brothers  were  not  equal  -  relations  were  not  hierarchical,  nor  egalitarian,  but 
differentiated  in  Station  and  influence.  This  language  also  reflected  a  brother(cid:173)
hood  in which  the whole  counted  for  more  than  the  individual  parts.24 The  lan(cid:173)
guage  of  brotherhood  served  to  reinforce  ties  among  the  members, to  reinforce 
oaths  of  loyalty  -  and  to  suggest  a  model  of  association  which  contrasted  with 
the  patriarchal  papal  and  imperial  hierarchies.  The  guilds  in  Zürich  offered  a 
form  of  association  in  which  access  to  positions  of  importance  was  not  closed, 
but  followed  a  carefully  designated  and  controlled  path,  and  in  which  the  col-
lectivity  could  act effectively  within  the  political  and  economic  life  of  the  town, 
even  if  single  members  could  not.25 

Zürich  in  the  1520's was a town  defined  by guilds. The  last  two  active  patri-
cian families  were being forced  to act through  the  patrician  Constaffler  guild, its 
own  power  curtailed  in  the  preceding  50 years. To  the  people  of  southwestern 
Germany,  the  town  of  Zürich  represented  an  image  of  fraternity:26  guilds,  not 

19  AZürcherRef  no. 620; Pf ister (Anm.  15), 358  ff. 
20  Both Jacob and Morf AZürcherRef  explore  the  influence  of  different  guilds. On the 
career of one members of a less powerful  guild, see Heinzpeter Stucki,  Bürgermeister 
Hans  Rudolf  Lavater  1492-1557, Zürich  1973 (Zürcher  Beiträge zur  Reformations(cid:173)
zeit, 3). 

21  On the intervention of the wool weavers' guild in the dispensation of one of its mem-
ber's  widow's  inheritance,  see  StAZ, A  77,  12, unnumbered,  apparently  duplicated 
from  the  Ratsbuch  of  1466. 

22  This is especially clear in Jacob's (Anm. 15) prosopography of town Council members, 

23  The guild charters of the fourteenth  Century employ the term, "Gesellen", to describe 
their  associations  (StAZ, A  73, various).  In  1480, however,  when  the  Shoemakers' 
guild excluded a member, they referred  to him as "bruder" (StAZ, A  73,2: no. 3, da-
ted 1480). 

24  See especially Black, Chapter  2 (Anm. 5). 
25  This is one of Morf's (Anm.  15) major  arguments. 
26  Thomas  A.Brady, Jr., Turning  Swiss:  Cities  and  Empire,  1450-1550,  Cambridge, 

104  ff. 

1985. 

365 

private  wealth  or  noble  birth,  formed  the  basis  for  political,  economic,  and  so(cid:173)
cial  influence. 

In  1524,  Zwingli  drew  upon  the  language  of  brotherly  love  when  he  formu-
lated  his  response  to  the  peasants  and  artisans  who  were  refusing  to  pay  the 
tithe,  who  were  increasingly  sympathetic  to  the  nascent  Anabaptist  or  radical 
party,  and  who  addressed  one  another  as  "brother  in  Christ."27  This  work,  Wer 
Ursach  gebe  zu  Aufruhr 
(Who  is  the  Source  of  Sedition),  represents  one  of 
Zwingli's  more  extensive  and  complex  efforts  to  articulate  the  nature  of  the 
Christian  Community  on  earth.  Zwingli  grounded  his  response  in  Matthew 
2 2 : 3 9: 

Mark  briefly  therefore:  God  commands: you  should  love your neighbor  as yourself.  If you 
fulfill  that, then you  do not need  many of God's  commandments,  namely: You  should  not 
kill,  not  steal,  not  commit  adultery,  lie.  For  whoever  loves  his  neighbor  as himself,  does 
not  lie  to  him;  for  he  will  also  not  suffer  that  one  lies  to  him.  Therefore  we  would  not 
need  the  sum  of  all  commandments  Gal.  5[:14]. We  would  not  need  the  commandment 
in  Romans  13[:7]: "You  should give  to all men, what you  owe them", if each  man  were  to 
love  his  neighbor  as  himself.28 

Zwingli  employed  the  terms  the  radicals  used  to  describe  themselves.29  Yet 
he  linked  those  terms  not  with  the  Anabaptist  egalitarian  vision  of  society,  not 
with  any  reshaping  of  economic  or  social  relations,30  but  with  a  notion  of  debt. 

27  Much  has  been  written  on  Zwingli's  troubled  relation  with  the  Anabaptists.  See,  for 
example,  Harold  S.Bender,  Conrad  Grebel,  1498-1526,  The  Founder  of  the  Swiss 
Brethren,  Sometimes  called  Anabaptists,  Goshen  1950;  Fritz  Blanke,  Brüder  in  Chri(cid:173)
sto,  Die  Geschichte  der  ältesten  Täufergemeinde  (Zollikon  1525), Zürich  1955;  John 
H. Yoder, The  Turning  Point  in  the  Zwinglian  Reformation,  in:  Mennonite  Quarterly 
Review  32  (1958),  128-40;  as  well  as  the  more  general  Claus-Peter Clasen, Anabap-
tism:  A  Social  History,  1525-1618,  Ithaca  1972,  and  James  M.Stayer,  Anabaptism 
and  the  Sword,  Lawrence,  Kansas  1976 (1972). 

28  «Merck  kurtz  also:  Gott  heysst:  du  solt  den  nächsten  also  lieb  haben  als  dich  selbs. 
Wenn  du  das erfüllest,  so darffst  du  ouch  viler gotzgebotten  nüts, nämlich: Du  solt  nit 
töden,  nit  stälen,  eebrechen,  liegen.  Dann  welcher  den  nächsten  als lieb  halt  als  dich 
selbs, der  lügt  imm  nit; denn  er wil  ouch  nit  lyden, das man  imm  liege. Also  dörftind 
wir  viler  gotzgebotten  nit,  wenn  wir  die  summ  aller  gebotten  Galt.  5  hieltind.  Wir 
dörfftind  das  gebottes  Ro.  13: <Ir sollend  allen  menschen  geben,  das  ir  inen  schuldig 
sind>  nit,  wenn  yeder  den  nächsten  als  lieb  hielte  als  sich  selbs.»  Welche  Ursach  ge(cid:173)
bind  ze  ufruren,  originally  published  by  Christoph  Froschauer  in  Zürich,  in  1524, re-
printed  under  the  title  of  «Wer  Ursach  gebe  zu  Aufruhr  usw.,»  in  Corpus  Reformato-
rum,  (hereafter  CR), vol.  90:  Zwingiis  Sämtliche  Werke,  (hereafter  Z), vol.  III, 4 0 1-
402. 

29  This  was  not  the  first  time  that  Zwingli  used  this  language,  nor  the  only  context. 
Heiko  A. Oberman notes  the  function  and  significance  of  the  identification,  "Bruder  in 
Christo", in  the "Synode" of January,  1523, in: Werden  und Wertung, Tübingen  1979, 
295-303;  as  does  Hans-Christoph  Kublack  (Anm.  9), 397  ff. 

30  On  Anabaptist  positions,  see, in  addition  to  Clasen  and  Stayer,  Kenneth  Davis,  Ana(cid:173)
baptism  and  Asceticism,  Scottdale  1974; and  Walter  Klaassen,  Michael  Gaismair,  Re(cid:173)
volutionär  and  Reformer,  Leiden  1978. 

366 

Zwingli  directly  connected  brotherly  love  with  the  text  of  Romans  13, stating 
that  love  of  neighbor  impels  the  payment  of  debt.  On  one  level, he  was  invok-
ing the  mutual  Obligation  that  the guilds demanded  of  their  members.31  Obliga(cid:173)
tions  for  Zwingli, and  for  the  guilds, were  not  only  of  an  intangible  nature,  but 
also of  a concrete, material  nature. He  reminded  his audience: as a member  of a 
brotherhood,  one has debts -  financial  and  material  responsibilities  -  which  one 
willingly  acknowledges  and  pays. 

Zwingli's  use  of  Romans  13:7  also  draws  upon  a  deeper  level  of  meaning. 
The  language  of  Romans  13 :7 had  a different  connotation  in  the  sixteenth  Cen(cid:173)
tury, which  did  not  know  the  notion  of  private  property  as we  do  today:  prop-
erty  was  not  held  absolutely,  but  conditionally,  through  custom,  through  privi-
lege,  through  law,  through  marriage  and  kinship,  through  memory.  Zwingli's 
position  on  property  ownership  followed  traditional  lines:  property  was  or-
dained  by  God  and  had  been  distributed  originally  according  to  divine  will.32 
Man has received  his property from  God; he is first  God's  debtor. Thus,  Zwingli 
argued,  those  who  refuse  to  pay  tithes, who  refuse  to give  to  all  men  what  they 
owe  them,  have  assumed  that  their  possession  of  goods  is absolute, that  is, that 
they  have  the  füll  right  to  determine  the  use  of  their goods  or wealth. Their  de-
cisions  about  the  use  of  their  property  are  controlled  by  their  own  selfish  con-
cerns.33  If  each  man  were  to  love  his  neighbor  as  much  as  himself,  this  love 
would  be  a  counterforce  to  his  self-interest,  weakening  its  hold.  A  man  would 
then  be  better  able  to  recognize  that  his  neighbor's  need  constituted  a  fair  and 
moral  demand  on  his goods.34  In  loving  his neighbor,  his brother,  a man  would 
be  able  to  recognize  that  his  property  was  subject  to  demands  higher  than  his 
own,  to  uses  determined  by  his  Community  and  God. 

Zwingli  argued  in this text that  the  only Christian  motivation  in questions of 
temporal  goods  is  fraternal  love.  Love  of  neighbor  -  the  law  of  Matthew 
22 :39 -  should  be  the  Standard  for  each  Christian  in  determining  the  use  of  his 
wealth.  For  Zwingli,  economic  transactions  were  symbolic  of  deeper  motives: 
while  wealth  itself  is neither  good  nor  evil, its use  is an  external  sign  of  a  man's 
inner  nature. To refuse  to  pay one's communal  debts was to  deny one's  brother(cid:173)
hood  with  one's  neighbor,  and  that,  for  Zwingli,  was  to  express  that  attitude 
most  basely  human  and  most  removed  from  God. 

31  Black (Anm. 5); StAZ, A  73, various: Guild Charters. 
32  Leonhard  von  Muralt, Zwingli  als  Sozialpolitiker,  in: Zwingliana  5 (1931), 283-84. 
See also, Gottfried W. Locher, Der Eigentumsbegriff  als Problem evangelischer Theolo(cid:173)
gie, Zürich and Stuttgart  1962, 29-35. On the economic theories delineated by schol-
ars of  the fifteenth  and early sixteenth  centuries, especially with regard  to the use of 
wealth, see  Oberman (Anm. 29), Chapter 8. 

33  Wer Ursach gebe zu Aufruhr  (Anm. 28), 402  ff. 
34  Paul  Wernle,  Der  evangelische  Glaube  nach  den  Hauptschriften  der  Reformatoren, 

vol. 2: Zwingli, Tübingen  1919, 113. 

367 

It  is  at  this  point  that  Zwingli's  use  of  the  language  of  brotherly  love  leads  us 
into  the  heart  of  his  theology.33  For  Zwingli,  the  vision  of  Community  was  inse-
parable  from  man's  relationship  to  God.  Only  in  Zwingli's  definitions  of  man's 
nature  and  of  God's  grace  -  of  the  relationship  of  God  to  man  -  shall  we  dis-
cover  the  anchoring  of  his  language  of  brotherly  love.  Others  have  explored 
Zwingli  's  theology  with  care  and  precision;  I  wish  here  only  to  touch  on  its  re(cid:173)
lationship  to  Zwingli's  notion  of  brotherly  love. 

As  Zwingli  was  to  argue  in  his  major  theological  treatise,  Concerning  True 
and  False  Religion, 
to  value  oneself  over  one's  neighbor,  to  allow  one's  own  in-
terests  to  overrule  communal  obligations,  was  the  expression  of  fallen  h u m an 
nature: 

By nature, therefore, man  is a lover of seif, not by that nature, with which  he had  been  fur-
nished  and  provided  by God, but by that fate, which  God  had given  him, not content  with 
his  own  house,  he  desired  to  become  knowledgeable  in  good  and  evil, indeed  to  become 
equal  with  God.  Since  therefore  man  becomes  accused  of  self-love,  and  condemned  by 
this  crime, it  is manifest,  that  the  death  of  sin, because  it  pertains  to  the  mind,  is that,  by 
which  man  loves  himself  continuously,  pleases  himself,  trusts  in  himself, bears  all  things 
received  to  himself,  thinks  to  see  what  is  straight,  what  is  crooked;  and  what  he  himself 
approves  he  believes  ought  to  be  approved  by  all, even  his  creator.36 

Zwingli's  definition  of  man  centers  on  the  psychological:  m an  is  the  creature 
whose  nature  is  self-love.  A nd  it  is  that  part  of  h u m an  nature  that  led  to  man's 
fall  from  grace.  Love  of  seif  is  the  essence  of  sin: 

This, then, is the bait which  [Adam] longed  for, and  by which  he was captured: to be  God, 
to  know  himself  what  is good, what  is evil. Yet, where  eise  could  this  appetite  have  origi-
nated,  than  love  of  seif?  For  we  all  prefer  that  it  be  better  for  ourselves  than  for  others: 
love  of  seif,  therefore,  was  the  cause,  why  Adam  acquiesced  to  the  evil  counsel  of  his 
wife.37 

i5  For  more  thorough  and  detailed  treatments  of  Zwingli's  theology,  see  W.P. Stephens, 
The  Theology  of  Huldrych  Zwingli,  Oxford  1986;  Gottfried  W.Locher, Huldrych 
Zwingli  in  neuer  Sicht,  Zürich  1969. 

16  "Natura  ergo  est  homo  sui  amans, non  ea natura,  qua  institutus  fuerat  praeditusque  a 
deo, sed  qua  sorte, quam  deus  dederat,  non  contentus  domi  suae voluit  boni  malique 
peritus,  imo  deo  aequalis  fieri.  Amoris  ergo  suiipsius  cum  sit  reus  factus  homo,  eius-
que  criminis  damnatus, manifestum  fit, quod  peccati mors, quod  ad ingenium  adtinet, 
ea  sit, qua  se homo  perpetuo  amat,  sibi  placet,  se  fidit,  sibi  omnia  fert  accepta,  videre 
putat,  quid  rectum,  quid  curvum  sit;  ac  quod  ipsi  probatur,  omnibus  probari  debere 
pinatur,  etiam  creatori  suo."  De  vera  et  falsa  religione  commentarius,  reprinted  in 
ZIII  (CR90), 657. 

17  "Haec  est  ergo  esca,  quam  adpetivit,  quaque  captus  est:  deum  esse,  ipsummet  scire, 
quid  bonum,  quid  malum. Veruntamen  hie  adpetitus  unde  originem  potuit,  quam  ex 
amore  sui?  Omnes  enim  nobis  malumus  bene  esse  quam  aliis: philautia  ergo, id  est: 
amor  sui,  causa  fuit,  cur  malesuadae  obtemperaret  uxori  Adam"  (Anm.  36). 

368 

Love  of  seif,  therefore,  is the cause  of  man's  fall;  it  is the  original  sin. And in 
Zwingli's  own  society,  the  expression  of  self-love,  or  self-interest  [eigennutz], 
was  the manifestation  of  man's  fallen  nature. 

Zwingli's  notion  of  self-love  is relatively  simple: it is the wish  for "things  to 
be  better  for ourselves  than  for others"; the placing of oneself  above  others; the 
illusion  of one's  own sufficiency;  and the focus  on seif  to the exclusion  of God 
and  other.  For  Zwingli,  man's  essential  flaw  consisted  of  that  psychological 
stance  most  opposed  to all ties of Community.38  Human  sin lay in the denial of 
ties  not only  to God, but to one's  neighbor.  The origin  of sin lay in the lack of 
brotherly  love. 

Unrestrained,  this  self-love  would  bring  plunder,  rape,  murder,  patricide, 
chaos  -  destroying  all form  of  social  life.  To  control  this  self-love,  Zwingli  ar-
gued,  the law was necessary, by which,  however,  he did not mean  civic  laws or 
customary  laws, but "the eternal will of God."39  For Zwingli, that law was  found 
in  Matthew 22 :39 and in Matthew  7:12: "All things, therefore, you wish men to 
do  to you, you should  do to them."  He found  it again  in  Romans  13:9, where 
Paul  said  that  all  laws  were  gathered  in  one  law: love  your  neighbor  as  your-
self.40 All other laws that did not fall  under  this one had been  made  obsolete by 
Christ: "For 'Christ  is the end of the law', Romans  10[:4]." Christ  and the new 
covenant  brought  a new Order  in  the  relationship  between  man and  God, the 
order  of  love, according  to Zwingli, and '"the end of the law is love'  1 Timothy 
1[:5]."41  The love  of God that  had been  made  manifest  in  Christ  brought  to an 
end the rule of law that had existed in the Old Testament, and replaced it with a 
solitary  new law. That law was no more  and no less than  "love your  neighbor as 
yourself."  Thus,  for  Zwingli,  love  of  neighbor  constituted  the  fundamental  act 
of  the pious  Christian: if one wishes  to live in accordance  with  the law of God, 
one  must  love  one's  neighbor  as  oneself.42  Thus  the  manifestation  of  piety 
within  a Christian  Community  is the presence  of  brotherly  love. 

Central elements of Zwingli's theology are framed  in the language of brother(cid:173)

ly  love. His definitions  of  human  nature  and of  human  sin -  self-love  -  reflect 
the  preeminent  place  that  he  gives  Matthew  22:39  in  his  understanding  of 
man's  relationship  to  God. At  the  core  of  his  theology  is  the  Opposition  be-

38  Alfred Farner, Die Lehre von Kirche und Staat bei Zwingli, Tübingen  1930,  33. 
39  "Lex nihil aliud est, quam aeterna dei voluntas.": De vera et falsa religione, 707 (Anm. 

36). 

40  Ibid. 707-708. 
41 

'"Finis  enim  legis Christus' Rom. 10 [:4] et 'finis  legis charitas';  1 Tim. 1 [:5]." Ibid. 
708. 

42  "Fragt man nach dem Inhalt der göttlichen  Gerechtigkeit  als Forderung an den Ein(cid:173)

zelnen wie an die gesellschaftliche  Welt, so kann es letztlich nur eine Antwort geben, 
nämlich, 'Liebe'.": Arthur  Rieh,  Zwingli  als sozialpolitischer  Denker,  Zwingliana 13 
(1969/1),  73. 

369 

tween  two  kinds  of  love:  love  of  seif,  [or  philautia],  and  love  of  other,  both 
neighbor  and God. 

In  some  ways  the  tension  Zwingli  posed  between  love  of  seif  and  love of 
neighbor  mirrors  that  posed  by the guilds, the monasteries, and the  confraterni-
ties:  the  demands  of  Community,  of  multiple  others,  upon  the  seif.  Each  of 
these  medieval  forms  of association  sought  to enforce  the preeminence  of  oth(cid:173)
ers -  "neighbors" -  over the demands  of the individual. They  sought  to create a 
relationship  between  the  seif  and  others  in  which  the  seif  was  subjugated, 
through  external  constraints,  to the whole, and, to  some  extent,  trained  to wil-
lingly,  that  is, internally,  acquiesce  to  the  needs  of  others.  Each  represents  in 
some  way the effort  to  bend  the  Single  will  to the bonds  of  Community. 

These  were  also  forms  of  association  of  unequal  partners.  The guilds  espe-
cially  did  not  seek  to  restructure  patterns  of  wealth  or  Status.  Here,  too, 
Zwingli's vision of brotherhood  reflected  the guilds: in the new Christian  broth-
erhood  property  was not to be  redistributed,  political  and  social  arrangements 
were not to be dismantled.43  One was bound  to a new brotherhood  in which re-
lations of influence  and wealth were maintained, and in which  one's own wishes 
were  subsumed  under  the  whole  community's.  Members  were,  moreover,  not 
free  to form  new associations, sects, which  more  closely  matched  their  own in(cid:173)
dividual  interests  and needs. 

What  bound  one to  that  brotherhood?  If we recall  Zwingli  's  definition  of 
human  nature,  as  self-loving,  it  becomes  clear  that  we  do  not yet  have  all the 
pieces: how does  love  of  neighbor  become  possible  for man, if,  by his very na(cid:173)
ture,  man loves  only  himself?  For Zwingli,  man, by his  nature,  could  not  love 
his  neighbor,  or indeed,  God. God was the sole  agent.  It is through  God  alone 
that  man becomes  able  to love  an  other: 

Thus are we made free [of the old law]: He who loves, does all things freely, even the most 
difficult. God therefore has sent into our hearts the fire, by which he lights love of him in 
place of love of ourselves; and he desires this fire to burn, Luke 12[:49].44 

For Zwingli, the sign of grace for each  Christian is the experience  of God's  love; 
the  experience  of that  fire  is divine  love  made  present  in the life  of a Christian. 
It  is the love  of  God lived. And the  sign  of  that  experience  is Christian  broth-
erly  love.  Brotherly  love  is  the  temporal,  human  manifestation  of  that  experi(cid:173)
ence  of  God's  love  -  and the source  of  brotherly  love  is divine  love. 

In  the Latin  text  of  On True and  False Religion, Zwingli  used  the word  cari-

43  Although  Zwingli argued  this in Wer Ursach zu Aufruhr  gebe, his füllest  expression 
of this  position can be found  in Von göttlicher und menschlicher  Gerechtigkeit (re-
printed in ZU (CR 89), 458-525). 

44  "Sic sumus liberati: Qui amat, libere omnia facit, etiam gravissima. Immisit ergo deus 
ignem in corda nostra, quo amorem sui pro amore nostri accenderet; et hunc ignem 
vult ardere, Luc. 12 [:49].": De vera et falsa  religione 710 (Anm.  36). 

370 

tas  to  describe  the  cycle  of  love  between  God  and  man,  recalling  Augustine's 
formulation  of Caritas from  agape and  eros.45 Although  his formulation  was sim(cid:173)
pler  than  Augustine's  -  love  of  seif  opposed  love  of  God  and  neighbor  -  he  re-
turned  to  the  elements  originally  encompassed  by  the  terms  Augustine  had 
used: God's  love, man's  love  of  God,  and  love  of  neighbor.  Zwingli  returned  to 
Augustine, also, in  placing  God's  love, the  divine  "fire", at the  center  of his  idea 
of  Caritas -  the  fire  of  God's  love is the  source  for all those  forms  of  human  love 
which  have  as  their  object  God  or  another. 

Thus,  for  Zwingli,  true  Christian  brotherly  love  became  the  sign  of  God's 
presence  in  a  Christian.  More,  collectively  expressed,  Christian  brotherly  love 
signified  the  presence  of  God  in  the  whole  Community.  Each  individual  might 
effect  changes  in  his  or  her  immediate  relations,  but  collectively,  the  Commu(cid:173)
nity  could  reshape  the  whole  society  according  to  brotherly  love: 

Briefly: where Christian  hearts and the fear of God are, there will one perform  all things 
honorably, piously, and correctly: for  love can do all things  and  fails no  one; for  God is 
love. Where love is, there is God. Where God is, there  one may not  fail. What  is begun 
with God  no one may break. What is erected  against him must  break.46 

Many  scholars  have  recognized  a  connnection  between  Zwingli's  theology 
and  his  vision  of  a  Christian  Community.  Stegfried  Rother  has  argued  that  the 
two  are  inseparable:  what  distinguishes  Zwingli's  thought  from  Luther's  is  his 
conviction  that  the  commandment  to  love  God  and  one's  neighbor  is  not  only 
the  basis  of  Christian  social  ethics,  but  the  origin  for  any  consideration  of  the 
nature  of  man  and  his  relationship  to  God.47  That  commandment  lies  at  the 
very  core  of  Zwingli's  theology.  Zwingli's  theology  is  defined  in  terms  of  love, 
that  Christian  ideal  which  engages  a  man  with  his  neighbor:  the  expression  of 
piety  for  a  Christian,  according  to  Zwingli,  is  the  engagement  in  the  human 
Community. 

The  communal  and  the  individual,  the  external  and  the  internal,  are  linked 
in  each  pious  Christian  through  brotherly  love, according  to  Zwingli's  theology. 

45  On the place of Caritas in Augustine's thought, see Dictionnaire de Spiritualite, 527ff., 
and Anders Nygren, Agape and Eros, trans., Philip S.Watson, Chicago 1982, esp. 449-
558. Zwingli's particular formulation  is Augustinian. For a study of the many conno-
tations of  Caritas, see Helene Petre, Caritas, Etüde sur le vocabulaire latin de la charite 
chretienne, Louvain 1948. 

46  "Kurtz: Wo christenliche  hertzen  und gotzforcht  sind, da wirt man alle ding erberr-
lich, frommklich  unnd formklich ansehen; dann die liebe kan's alles und välet nienen; 
denn gott ist die liebe. Wo die liebe ist, da ist gott. Wo gott ist, da mag man nit välen. 
Was mit gott wirt angehebt, wirt  nienman  mögen  brechen. Was wider inn  ufgericht 
wirt muss brechen": Wer Ursach gebe zu Aufruhr  458 (Anm. 28). 

47  Siegfried  Rother,  Die  religiösen  und  geistigen  Grundlagen  der  Politik  Huldrych 

Zwingiis, Erlangen  1956. 

371 

The  experience  of  God's  love leads  a Christian  to  form  social  bonds,  communal 
ties. For the  Christian, all relations -  social, political, economic  -  are founded  in 
brotherly  love.  Love  of  neighbor  leads  a  Christian  into  those  relations  and 
shapes  those  relations  according  to  God's  law. 

For  Zwingli  there  existed  no  visible  distinction  between  the  church,  which 
was "the  whole  people, the  whole  multitude  gathered  together",  and  the  polity 
of  the  town,  between  the  religious  and  the  political  communities. The  brother(cid:173)
hood  of  Christians  had  no  divisions,  either  into  smaller  sects,  or  into  different 
facets  of  collective  life: 

We discover  that  there  are not, as these  men  say, a sacerdotal and  a lay magistracy, but 
only one; for the power of the church, by which it keeps the shameless from  communion, 
is not  that  of  the  magistracy,...;  for  it  belongs  to  the  whole  church, not  to  those, who 
through  tyranny have usurped  for  themselves  the chief  part of all things.48 

Zwingli  saw  religious  authority  and  civic  authority  as  two  forms  of  human  au-
thority; both  were  separate  from  sacred  or  absolute  authority.49  It was  unneces-
sary, he  argued,  to  have  two  forms  of  human  authority: they  both  administered 
to  the  same  Christian  Community.  And  that  Community  was  knit  together  by 
brotherly  love.  If  man  by  nature  loves  only  himself,  then  brotherly  love  is  the 
only way a man  can willingly  enter  into  any  human  Community. All other  ways 
are  grounded  in  self-interest  and  are  destructive  of  true  brotherhood.  The  only 
effective  social  bond  is brotherly  love. 

Brotherly  love  is  also  the  legitimate  bond  between  men.  Let  us  recall  the 
various  threads  of  Zwingli's  argument.  If  men  follow  the  new  law  Christ  states 
in  Matthew  22 :39 -  love your  neighbor  as yourself  -  then  all other laws are  su-
perfluous.  Zwingli  also cited  Romans  13 :9, in which  Paul said that all laws were 
gathered  in  this  one  law  -  the  command  to  love  one's  neighbor  subsumes  all 
laws.  Indeed,  it  makes  all  laws  obsolete  (Romans  10:4)  for  if  men  love  one  an-
other,  they  will  need  no  other  law. Any  law which  is  not  subsumed  under  the 
law of  Matthew  22 :39, which  is not, in  other  words, made  obsolete  by  it, is  not 
in  accord  with  God's  law  and  has,  therefore,  no  validity. 

At  first  glance, such  an  argument  seems  radical  indeed. We  must  not  forget, 
however, the  precedence  that  Zwingli gave the  Community  over the  individual, 
the  demands  of  brotherhood  over  seif,  including  laws  that  reinforced  that 
brotherhood,  that  enforced  mutual  obligations.  Here,  too,  Zwingli's  vision  of  a 
Christian  Community  borrows  from  the  lessons  of  the guilds. For the  individual 
is  subsumed  under  the  Community,  both  through  the  internal  constraints  of 

48  "Invenimus autem, non ut isti dicunt, sacerdotalem  et laicalem esse magistratum, sed 
unum  tantum; nam  ecclesiae  potestas, qua impudentem  a communicatione  abstinet, 
magistratus non  est, ... nam totius ecclesiae est, non  quorundam, qui per tyrannidem 
sibi rerum summan vendicarunt."  De vera et falsa religione 877 (Anm. 36). 

49  Zwingli presented  this position  most fully  in  Von göttlicher und menschlicher Gerech(cid:173)

tigkeit (Anm. 43). 

372 

brotherly  love, and  through  the  external  constraints  of  collective  life. The  Chris(cid:173)
tian  Community  -  which  was  created  through  brotherly  love  -  would  serve  to 
reinforce  the  demands  of  brotherly  love: 

The  polity  demands  that  you  care  for  the  public  weal, not  the  private; that  dangers be 
shared in common, as well as fortunes, if practice demands it; that no one be sensible of 
himself; that no one be extolled; that  no one excite divisions.50 

Zwingli,  and  many  south  German  reformers,  drew  upon  an  ancient  familial 
bond  to  develop  a language  for  describing  relations  among  the  members  of  the 
renewed  Christian  communities. Their  preaching  resonated  familiär  values  and 
institutions. Each  incorporated  specific  characteristics  that  had  come  to be asso-
ciated  with  the  notion  of  brotherhood  within  his  own  local  Community.  For 
Zwingli,  the  most  influential  local  form  of  association  which  defined  itself  as a 
brotherhood  was the guild.  From  that  form  he  drew characteristics  that  are  cen(cid:173)
tral  to  an  understanding  of  his  use  of  the  language  of  brotherly  love.  First,  the 
notion  of  mutual  Obligation:  one  owes  certain  material  debts  to  the  brother(cid:173)
hood;  one  has  responsibilities  which  are  as  compelling  and  fundamental  as 
one's  benefits.  Second,  the  needs  of  the  individual  were  to  be  subjugated  to  the 
Community;  the  collectivity  had  precedence  over  individual  members.  Third, 
the  collectivity,  the  true  Christian  brotherhood,  had  far  more  power  and  influ-
ence  than  the  sum  of  its  individual  members. 

In  the  context  of  his  theology,  however,  Zwingli  transformed  the  definition 
of  neighbor, of brother,  of  the  object  of  that  love of  other.  Love of  neighbor  was 
no  longer  to  be  directed  solely to  the  members  of  a narrowly  defined  group  -  a 
confratemity,  a guild.  It  was  not  to  be  restricted  to  those  with  whom  one  had 
consented  to  form  a Community.  Its  boundaries  were  not  to  be  determined  by 
man, according  to  external  and  therefore  artificial  Standards, but  by God.  In  an-
choring  it in  his theology, he  removed  a central  characteristic  of  earlier  fratemi-
ties: their voluntarism. Guilds, confraternities,  and  monasteries  were all  founded 
on  the  notion  of  the  consent  of  their  members  -  members  chose  to  enter  those 
forms  of  fratemity.  For  Zwingli,  fraternal  relations  were  possible  only  through 
God's  grace:  man  alone  could  never  enter  into  a  Christian  brotherhood  -  he 
was not  capable  of  loving  his neighbor  as much  as himself. That  shift  in  the  na-
ture  of brotherhood  realigned  the  boundaries  of  the  Christian  Community.  Love 
of  neighbor  was no  longer  restricted  to  those  with  whom  one  had  consented  to 
form  a  Community.  Its  boundaries  were  not  to  be  determined  by  man,  accord(cid:173)
ing  to  external  and  therefore  artifical  Standards,  but  by  God.  Man,  moreover, 
could  not fully  know whom  God  had  chosen  for  the  Christian  brotherhood.  For 
Zwingli,  and  others,  therefore,  the  boundaries  of  the  Christian  brotherhood 

50  "Requirit  civitas, ut  rem  publicam  colas, non  privatem;  ut  communia  habeantur  peri-
cula, etiam  fortunae,  si usus postulet; ut  nemo  sibi sapiat; ut  nemo  extollatur; ut  nemo 
factiones  excitet."  De  vera et falsa  religione 867  (Anm.  36). 

373 

were  to  coincide  with  the  boundaries  of  each  Community  -  the  physical  extent 
of  each  congregation,  its  farthest  reach  -  determined  the  boundaries  of  each 
Christian  community: political, social, and  economic  boundaries  coincided  with 
religious  ones. Zwingli  erased  the  lines  drawn  by  those  brotherhoods  he  called 
false: the  confraternities  and  the  monasteries. Their  boundaries  were  drawn  too 
narrowly  -  they  reflected  man's  choice  of  membership,  rather  than  God's. 
Zwingli's  vision  of  the  reformed  Christian  brotherhood  also  smoothed  some  of 
the  stratification  that the  civic brotherhoods  of  the guilds had created. Although 
Zwingli  never  challenged  directly  the  kind  of  brotherhood  proposed  by  the 
guilds, his reformed  Christian  community  was open  to all the  people  of  Zürich. 
And  here  we  reach  the  compelling  force  of  Zwingli's  language  of  Christian 
brotherhood.  This  new  brotherhood  was  open  to  anyone  in  Zürich,  including 
those  who  were  too  poor,  too  unskilled,  handicapped,  to  belong  to  any  guild, 
those  to  whom  the  right  to  form  a guild  had  been  denied,  those  who  had  been 
excluded  from  the  formally  recognized  brotherhoods  of  late  medieval  Zürich. 
Love of neighbor,  according  to  Zwingli, extended  to  those  who were not  broth-
ers  through  kinship,  through  craft,  or  through  rituals  and  oaths,  but  solely 
through  fellowship  in  Christ. 

As we  have  seen, all were  not  to  participate  equally  in  the  wealth  and  politi(cid:173)
cal  authority  of  the  community.  Yet  all  were  equally  bound  to  the  new  Chris(cid:173)
tian  community  through  Christian  brotherly  love.  All  could  know  the  fire  of 
God's  love.  All  who  acknowledged  the  mutual  obligations  of  a  Christian 
brotherhood,  who  subjugated  their  individual  needs  to  the  needs  of  the  com(cid:173)
munity,  also  received  benefits,  benefits  that  were  compelling.  Collectively, 
Zwingli's  new  brotherhood  made  manifest  Christian  love,  even  if  individual 
members  might  still be  subject  to self-interest.  And  such  a community  was very 
powerful  indeed,  for  "where  love  is, there  is God; where  God  is, there  one  may 
not  fail". 

Lee Palmer Wandel, Department  of  History, P.O.Box  1504 A, Yale Station, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-7425, USA. 

374 

