Joseph C. McLelland

Vermigli on Penance: A third Sacrament?

Vermigli on Penance: A third Sacrament? 1

by Joseph C. McLelland

«Penance is a sacrament of the New Law constituted by Christ in which forgiveness
of sins committed after baptism is granted through the priest’s absolution to those
who with true sorrow confess their sins and promise to satisfy the same.» (Cath.
Enc., loc. cit.). «The acts of the penitent, contrition, confession and satisfaction,
form as it were its matter (quasi materia).» (Council of Trent, Sess. XIV, ch. 3).

The doctrine of penance or penitence against which the Reformers reacted
developed during the middle ages, inﬂuenced in part by the Celtic system of
«penitentials» and the need for priestly authority («the power of the keys»). 2
Church Fathers, otherwise admired by the Reformers, contributed to this
development, as in the canons of the Council of Nicaea which Melanchthon
noted in his «Catalogue of ancient abuses.» 3 Jerome called penance «a second
plank after a shipwreck.» 4 Thomas Aquinas devoted a long treatise to it as a
sacrament (ST 1a QQ 84–90); also Peter Lombard (Sent. IV, dist. 14–17). The
Fourth Lateran Council (1215) called by Innocent III made the rule of auric-
ular confession absolute, and it was recognized as a proper sacrament by the
Council of Trent. It has been described as a growing inﬂuence in Western Eu-
rope from the late 15th to the early 17th centuries. 5 Penance thus became an in-
tegral part of Christian identity, in that confession is the beginning of the way
to union with God; it is the priestly Ego te absolvo that guarantees absol-
ution. There was also the strange twist in which the punishment became itself
the cause of absolution. 6

Protestants attempted to relate the concept to their own views of sin and
salvation. In the eyes of the Reformers, its function within church order led
to abuse of clerical authority and reinforced a theology of works righteous-
ness. It also contributed to the idea that sins are never ﬁnally forgiven, that
God constantly demands reparation for wrongdoing. Nevertheless, Martin

1

2

3

Presented to the Sixteenth Century Studies Conference, Salt Lake City, 27 October 2006.
E.g. J. T. McNeill, The Celtic Penitentials and their Inﬂuence on Continental Christianity
(Paris, 1923): «the private and secret nature of the penance is a simple projection into the
Latin church of the practice of the Celts» (181).
See Douglas Shantz, «Vermigli on Tradition and the Fathers,» in Peter Martyr Vermigli and
the European Reformations, ed. Frank A James III (Leiden: Brill, 2004), 134f.
Jerome, Ep. 130, 9.

4
5 Katharine Lualdi, ed. Penitence in the Age of Reformation (St Andrews Studies in Reforma-

tion History, 2000).

6 K. Ross, Hearing Confession (London: SPCK, 1974) 10f.

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

29

Joseph C. McLelland

Luther regarded it highly, at ﬁrst accepting its sacramental nature (e.g. in The
Babylonian Captivity) but later retracting this view because it lacked a dis-
tinctive outward sign. In its place Lutheranism came to adopt private confes-
sion as a consolation for the soul. 7 John Calvin rejected it outright, allowing
the Genevan Consistory to play the role of judge and confessor. 8 In England,
the exhortation for Ash Wednesday in the 1549 Book of Common Prayer
(«A Penitential Service») notes the primitive church custom of a season of
«penitence and fasting,» when sinners «separated from the body of the faith-
ful, were reconciled and restored to the fellowship of the Church by peni-
tence and forgiveness.»

Peter  Martyr  Vermigli’s  teaching  on  the  doctrine  will  be  examined
through three key documents: his ﬁrst work, on the Creed, his biblical com-
mentaries,  and  the  chief  source,  his  treatise  De  Poenitentia.  But  ﬁrst  we
should note the inﬂuence of both Melanchthon and Calvin.

Melanchthon and Calvin

During  his  triennium  as  abbot  of  S. Pietro  ad  Aram  in  Naples,  Vermigli
began  to  read  the  transalpine  Reformers;  we  know  these  included  Bucer,
Zwingli and Erasmus. 9 At least on his arrival in Strasbourg in 1542, Bucer
would have introduced him to Melanchthon’s Loci and Calvin’s Institutes.
Barbara  Pitkin  has  argued  the  role  of  Melanchthon’s  locus  on poenitentia
(1521) as the «decisive turning point of reference» 10 for Calvin’s 1536 and
1539 editions. This involved the distinctions contritio, ﬁdes and nova oboe-
dientia, a more positive emphasis than traditional polemics against Roman
teaching, «the positive redeﬁnition of evangelical poenitentia.» Melanchthon
treats the topic in the context of the sacraments, accepting absolution as a
sacrament. Strasbourg’s Martin Bucer, of course, played mentor to both Cal-
vin (1538–41) and Vermigli (1542–47); his creative work on church order, in-
cluding discipline, was surely of moment for both Reformers.

Calvin changes the context in the 1536 Institutiones, placing it within the
«ﬁve false sacraments.» Repentance is the mortiﬁcation of the ﬂesh accom-
plished  by  the  fear  of  God  (hence,  prior  to  faith).  In  1539  it  has  its  own
chapter (5) following the discussion of the Creed. Here and in 1559 he cites

7

8

See, e.g., R. K. Rittgers, The Reformation of the Keys: Confession, Conscience, and Authority
in Sixteenth-Century Germany (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 2004).
See Max Thurian, Confession (London: Mowbray, 1985), ch. 1: «Protestant Criticism of the
Sacrament of Penance.»
See Simler’s Life (in Donnelly, PM Library vol. 5) p. 20.

9
10 Pitkin, quoting Olivier Millet – «Redeﬁning Repentance: Calvin and Melanchthon» in H. J.
Selderhuis, ed. Calvinus Praecepto Ecclesiae (Geneva: International Congress of Calvin Re-
search, 2002) pp. 275–85.

30

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

Vermigli on Penance: A third Sacrament?

docti  quidam  viri  who  distinguished  two  parts,  mortiﬁcation  and  viviﬁ-
cation, without specifying who these ancients are. In the deﬁnitive 1559 edi-
tion (III.iii) repentance is deﬁned as «mortiﬁcation of the ﬂesh and of the old
man and [in] the viviﬁcation of the spirit.» 11 Calvin heralds «the transition
from faith to repentance» as the ﬁrst of «the effects which we experience.»
The substance of the Gospel is «repentance and remission of sins,» but these
ﬂow from our «participation of Christ,» the unio Christi effected by faith.
This imago dei is «righteousness and true holiness;» so that «believers may
attain to this, God assigns them the race of repentance to run during their
whole life.» (§ 9). This prepares for Calvin’s great treatise on the Christian
life (III.vi-viii) which he promises as «evidence of a sincere repentance.» Pit-
kin concludes: «the eventual triumph of Calvin’s efforts to give the church
(rather than the magistrates) the power to regulate access to the sacraments,
and his explicit criticism of absolution as a sacrament, individual confession
of sin and reception of private absolution were nevertheless important fea-
tures in Calvin’s vision of ideal church practice.» 12 It is signiﬁcant that sub-
sequent Reformed teaching may be located – by Heinrich Heppe for instance
– under the heading of sanctiﬁcation, summarizing it as consisting of mortiﬁ-
cation and quickening, keeping remarkably close to Calvin’s distinctions. 13

1) Credo

Vermigli’s ﬁrst published work, the only one in Italian, was a commentary on
the Apostles’ Creed, Una Semplice Dichiaratione sopra gli XII Articoli della
Fede Christiana (Basel, 1544). Its early publication, and in Italian, so soon
after  leaving  Italy  suggests  that  it  reﬂects  his  evangelical  turn  of  recent
years. 14  It  is  curious  that  one  of  his  early  biographers,  F. C.  Schlosser,
thought that Vermigli accepted penance as a third sacrament. 15 In fact this
earliest writing provides a succinct and explicit statement declaring the op-
posite. It supports Robert Kingdon’s argument that Vermigli’s stress on dis-
cipline raised it to the third mark of the church (nota ecclesiae). 16 Kingdon’s

Inst. III.111.V.
11
12 Pitkin, p. 283.
13

15

See H. Heppe, Reformed Dogmatics (trans G. T. Thomson, London: Allen & Unwin, 1950)
pp. 571–76.

14 Una Semplice Dichiaratione sopra gli XII Articoli della Fede Christiana (Basel: Hervagius,
February 1544). Trans. by M. Di Gangi in Early Writings, Peter Martyr Library vol. 1, ed.
J. C. McLelland (Kirksville, MO: Sixteenth Century Journal Publishers, 1994), 91–159.
Schlosser, Leben des Theodor de Beza und des Peter Martyr Vermili (Heidelberg: Mohr u.
Zimmer, 1809) 397–98.

16 R. M. Kingdon, «Peter Martyr and the Marks of the True Church,» in Continuity and Dis-
continuity in Church History: Essays Presented to George Hunston Williams, ed. F. F. Church
& Timothy George (Leiden: Brill, 1979) 198–214.

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

31

Joseph C. McLelland

research, especially his paper to the 1999 Vermigli symposium in Kappel, ar-
gues cogently that Vermigli’s concept of discipline expanded Calvin’s to be-
come the formative inﬂuence on subsequent Reformed teaching. 17 The «curi-
ous disjunction in Calvin between teaching and action» created an opening
for Vermigli’s doctrine of discipline as an essential note of the church, to be
exercised by the whole community and to be given its extreme expression in
excommunication. The proper marks by which the true church is to be rec-
ognized  are  three:  «wherever  the  purity  of  doctrine  ﬂourishes,  the  sacra-
ments are administered purely, and discipline exercised, you have a congre-
gation  to  which  you  may  safely  join  yourself.» 18  Kingdon  concludes:
«Vermigli thought the exercise of discipline was an absolute necessity for a
properly ordered Christian church .. . he thought the most important tool in
establishing discipline was excommunication.»

No doubt Vermigli’s stress on discipline reﬂects his experience as Visitor
of the Augustinian Order (1539–41). He had already established a reputation
as diligent disciplinarian while Abbot in Spoleto (1533–36), infamous for its
factions and feuds. Philip McNair comments: «It was in Spoleto that he ﬁrst
manifested administrative genius. It was here that he gave demonstration of
that cast of mind which came to be known as Puritan. It was in Spoleto that
Peter  Martyr  became  a  reformer  .. .  For  evidently  there  was  much  to  re-
form.» 19

The Credo  has  three  sections  on  «The  Forgiveness  of  Sins»  (§§ 44–46)
with three topics. First is that absolution comes «by the grace and Spirit of
Christ,» received through faith. A second way is through the sacraments,
«visible  words  of  this  absolution.»  «We  can  respond  to  the  reality  repre-
sented only because of the inward movement of the Spirit of Christ.» (§ 45)
Moreover, «If you were to ask me which sacrament in the church expressly
signiﬁes this remission, I would answer: baptism.» So by Word and sacra-
ment the remission of sins is offered and sealed. As for «the third mode re-
lated to this remission» (§ 46), Vermigli means brotherly correction. Refer-
ring to Matthew 18:15–18 he states: «When those warned do not repent, they
are disciplined by separation as a last resort. This should last until they repent
of sins committed. With penitence for sin comes an end to the penalty of ex-
communication for sin.»

Such absolution relates to the authority granted to the church by Christ,
«the power of the keys.» To safeguard against abuses it is an authority shared

17 Robert M. Kingdon, «Peter Martyr Vermigli On Church Discipline,» in Peter Martyr Ver-
migli: Humanism, Republicanism, Reformation, ed. E. Campi (Geneva: Librairie Droz, 2002)
67–76. Euan Cameron, however, credits Luther’s 1538 Von der wahren Seelsorge with intro-
ducing the «third mark» of discipline (book review in JEH 1996, pp. 363–66).

18 Vermigli, ad Cor. 1; LC IV.6.17.
19 P. McNair, Peter Martyr in Italy (Oxford: Clarendon, 1967) 128.

32

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

Vermigli on Penance: A third Sacrament?

by the whole community of believers. «We do not depreciate the authority of
the church, but only deny that it should be entrusted to the will and whim of
one person acting alone.» He concludes: «But you see how this third mode
contains only the absolution of public sins, while the church through those
other two modes mentioned above exercises everywhere the remission of all
sorts of sins. Here we are dealing exclusively with the open kind, which by
their evil example offend and scandalize whoever hears and knows of them.»

2) Commentaries

While in Strasbourg Vermigli composed theses based on his Pentateuch lec-
tures for student debate. They include the following:

«We allow a confession of sins made not only to God but also to men.» (27.N. 16)
«Repentance is threefold: the ﬁrst is perfect and whole, which pleases God; an-
other is temporary, which God counts for something; the third is hypocritical,
which God detests.» (33.N. 9)

His Old Testament commentaries contain scattered references to the topic,
including the extended treatise De Poenitentia at the end of 2 Samuel. For
example, commenting in Judges on the story of the Israelites’ weeping under
judgment,  he  writes:  «true  and  lawful  repentance  consists  chieﬂy  of  two
principal points, a sorrow acknowledging the wicked acts committed, and a
sure conﬁdence to obtain pardon by Christ.» (Iud. 2:4) In this context he de-
clares that their ceremony (tears and sacriﬁce) showed «that by the death and
oblation of Christ all their sins were removed, and already forgiven. Without
doubt true repentance can be found only through such faith.»

Again: «People who are truly repentant wish very much that others might
be inﬂuenced by their example and abstain from vices. In my view those pub-
lic  confessions  of  transgressions  were  in  ancient  times  taking  place  in  the
church for the following reasons: to implore the prayers of those standing
by; second, to provoke others (if they had fallen into such practices) to come
to their senses by the example of those who groan under punishment; ﬁnally
and  most  importantly,  to  strengthen  still  others  to  keep  themselves  from
these  practices,  being  clearly  warned  of  the  consequences  of  such  beha-
vior.» 20

At Oxford (1547–53) Peter Martyr’s lectures on 1 Corinthians and Ro-
mans include passages on this and related themes. In 1 Corinthians 21 Vermigli

20 Lamentations 36:18 (PML vol. 6), trans. Dan Shute , 52–53.
21

In selectissimam D. Pauli Priorem ad Corinth., epistolam Commentarijs . . . (Zurich: C. Fro-
schauer, 1551).

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

33

Joseph C. McLelland

is clear that «two sacraments have been handed down to us by God» (10:2).
While there is no direct reference to the ordinance of penance, there are dis-
tinct echoes of Calvin’s twin emphases on mortiﬁcation and viviﬁcation: «re-
pentance and mortiﬁcation of evil desires are preached, by which our ﬂesh is
refurbished in a wonderful way» (10:7); «Faith refers to doctrine and repent-
ance to behavior» (11:27); «when we do penance and when we are converted
to God» it is «the working of the Holy Spirit» (11:25).

Vermigli is explicit on the role of discipline. In the scholium De ecclesia 22
he  deﬁnes  the  church  as  «a  company  of  believers  and  regenerate  people,
whom God gathers together in Christ, by the word and the Holy Spirit, and
by his ministers governs the same with purity of doctrine, with lawful use of
the sacraments, and with discipline.» Again: «Ecclesiastical discipline is noth-
ing else than a power granted to the church by God, by which the wills and
acts of the faithful are made to conform to God’s law. This is accomplished by
teaching, admonitions, correction, and ﬁnally by punishments and excom-
munication  if  required.»  This  sort  of  «medicine»  is  different  from  that
wielded by fathers or pastors or magistrates. While they should not allow sins
to pass unnoticed, the pastor must exert the «greater discipline» in order to
admonish and rebuke wayward brethren. (10:9)

The Treatise De Iustiﬁcatione (in ad Romanos) 23 states: regarding good
works of the penitent, the Fathers «were concerned about ecclesiastical sat-
isfactions, not our own works, by which God could be appeased or the for-
giveness of sins deserved.» 24 Martyr joins penance with good works in refut-
ing Richard Smith’s argument that «penal works (as he calls them) .. . were
required of men not so they should be justiﬁed before God through them,
but only to prove themselves to the church, that is, lest by a sham and af-
fected repentance they should seek to be reconciled» (§. 87). God does have
regard to true repentance, for by such «outward discipline .. . punishments of
this present life are avoided» (§ 29). «They claim that the Holy Scriptures at-
tribute a great deal to repentance; we do not deny it.» But it is the fruit of
faith, as it was with David and Peter, but not Judas. Therefore «it is not the
cause but the effect of justiﬁcation, for it follows faith, rather than precedes
it.» Auricular confession is «completely superstitious, we utterly reject it for
they impose it as something necessary for salvation and a reason why sins
should be forgiven, which they are never able to prove from the testimonies
of Scripture» (§ 32).

22 Rom. 1; LC IV.1.
23

In Epistolam S. Pauli Apostoli ad Romanos commentarij doctissimi . . . (Basel: P. Perna, 1558).
References are to the James translation of Predestination and Justiﬁcation (PML 8, 2003).
§ 22; quotations are from the James translation (p. 121).

24

34

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

Vermigli on Penance: A third Sacrament?

3) On Repentance

The lengthy scholium De Poenitentia appears at the very end of the com-
mentary on 2 Samuel. 25 It provides Martyr’s mature reﬂection on the sacra-
ments, affording deﬁnition, critique of the traditional seven sacraments, and
a clear exposition of his sacramental theology.

The treatise begins by declaring that there is «one purgation, which is set
forth to us by faith, which has repentance joined with it, by this men are
cleansed and are at rest.» God called our ﬁrst parents to such repentance,
echoed by the prophets, and by Christ himself: «Repent, for the kingdom of
heaven  is  near.»  The  kingdom  is  to  be  understood  as  «newness  of  life,
heavenly  actions,  and  regeneration.»  Therefore  it  is  not  the  case  that  we
should ﬁrst repent and by the merit of repentance have remission of sins.
«First it is apprehended by faith: afterwards a sound repentance follows.»
Rehearsing some Patristic deﬁnitions, he refers to Jerome on Ezekiel 16, and
the  decree De  Poenitentia,  that  «after  baptism,  repentance  is  the  second
bond» by which we swim from shipwreck. 26 He now surveys, in typical ex-
haustive fashion, scriptural texts on repentance, and then the Fathers. But
ﬁrst he notes that some «would have removed repentance entirely,» such as
the Novatians – and the Puritans! – as being self-righteous, and «denying re-
pentance to those that are fallen.»

The kinds and parts of repentance are analyzed: private, public and sol-
emn; then comes the crucial question whether this is a sacrament, «because in
a way it is the cause of forgiveness of sins.» But where is absolution, Martyr
asks, since this is the principal thing? Noting the origin of sacramentum in
mysterion (a signiﬁcant point, not always recognized or emphasized by other
Reformers), he states: «Sacraments are tokens by which God is bound to us
and we to him.» But to say merely «the sign of a holy thing,» is not enough;
«visible  sign  of  invisible  grace»  is  better,  showing  the  speciﬁc  relation  to
grace.

The Fathers acknowledged only two sacraments, «sometimes mentioning
repentance.» Hence, «those who say that the grace of forgiveness of sins is
signiﬁed by the same, tie themselves to these two alone, namely baptism and
the Lord’s supper.» Remission of sins may be signiﬁed by the imposition of
hands, but it is the effect of the Word of God. Contrition is «a sorrow lodged
in the will because of sins.» Confession is «to acknowledge and declare God’s
beneﬁts.» Auricular confession is not warranted by the Word of God, since
«sins should be showed to God himself, not to put God in mind of them (so

25

In  duos  Libros  Samuelis  Prophetae  .. .  Commentarii  doctissimi  . . .  (Zurich:  C. Froschauer,
1564), fol. 324v-334r. Also in LC/CP 3.8.

26 Tractatus de Poenitentia, dist. 1, ch. secunda tabula, PL 187, 1519ff.

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

35

Joseph C. McLelland

he knows our hearts) but that we may know our own selves, and see our own
miseries.» The problem is to know whether you have confessed everything:
this theory leaves one in perpetual doubt. Satisfaction is, as tradition held,
«the sign of true repentance, that the church might be well regarded.» There
is no condign merit, for the Pope is not «the disposer of the sufferings of
Christ  and  the  martyrs  and  other  saints.»  Rather,  the  good  works  of  the
godly «have the analogy and force of prayers.»

In sum, «we are to embrace true repentance that comes by faith, and that
speedily.» We must follow this way which Christ taught and weigh its effects,
namely renewal; «it works marvellous joys, ﬁrst in us, secondly in the church
and also among the heavenly company. . . . Lastly, God’s mercy must be set
forth, how ready he is to receive penitents.»

Conclusion

The texts show Vermigli’s consistent teaching on penance as non-sacramental
and  related  more  to  the  well-being  of  the  Christian  community  than  to
priestly absolution. As such it is necessary to maintain that moral rectitude
which is the fruit of justiﬁcation by faith; thus its extreme form of excom-
munication  must  be  acknowledged  as  sometimes  in  order.  Positively,  it  is
symbolic of the brotherly correction that elevates ecclesiastical discipline to
the third mark of the true church. Thus Vermigli reﬂects not only Calvin’s
«mortiﬁcation  and  viviﬁcation,»  but  also  the  general  Reformed  view  that
there are but two dominical sacraments, while repentance is tied to justiﬁ-
cation by faith and not to the priestly ofﬁce.

Abstract

Peter Martyr Vermigli deals with the doctrine of penance in three texts, his
early Credo, biblical commentaries, and the late treatise De Poenitentia; all
three are consistent in their teaching. Following the example of Melanchthon
and Calvin, he emphasizes the positive beneﬁts of repentance, namely mor-
tiﬁcation and viviﬁcation. He rejects the sacramental nature of absolution,
but makes repentance, private and public, part of his stress on discipline as
the third mark of the church.

Prof. (em.) Dr. Joseph C. McLelland, Montreal

36

Zwingliana XXXIV, 2007

