ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 46 (2019), 45–72

“Imprime´e de

diffe´rentes manie`res”

The Gallican Confession and its First

Printed Editions (1559?–1561) 1

Gianmarco Braghi

Introduction

The ministers assembled at the so-called first national synod of the
French Reformed church, held in Paris in May 1559, promulgated
the Gallican Confession and the Ecclesiastical Discipline. These are
considered the key documents of the French Reformation. As
Henri II harshly persecuted heretics, the pastors serving in Paris
did everything they could to keep the meeting out of the civil au-
thorities’ sight. Both Franc¸ois Morel – senior minister of the con-
gregation of Paris and moderator of the synod – and John Calvin
advised the brethren assembled to exercise extreme caution and
discouraged any form of disclosure of the Confession to a wider
audience. A few days before the meeting, Calvin wrote to Morel
and urged the participants not to make such an imprudent move.2
After the synod, Morel feared that some among the delegates, in

1 I am thankful to Dr Christian Moser and to Dr Gergely Csuka´s for their kind
assistance during the publication process and to Dr Taraneh Wilkinson for proofreading
a final version of this paper. Translations, unless otherwise stated, are all mine.

2 John Calvin to Franc¸ois Morel (17 May 1559), in: Ioannis Calvini opera quae

supersunt omnia [CO], vol. 17 (1877), 525f.

46

Gianmarco Braghi

spite of his clear admonition not to do so, could incautiously dis-
seminate or print the Confession on their return home.3 As I have
recently argued, Morel’s and Calvin’s instructions were taken se-
riously, as there is indeed no evidence that the Gallican Confession
was printed and/or circulated to a wider audience in the second
half of 1559.4 However, this begs the question of when exactly the
leading French Reformed ministers – in concert with Calvin and
the Venerable Company of Pastors of Geneva – decided to print
the Gallican Confession to make it available to a less restricted
audience. In this article I will articulate a hypothesis about the
timing and strategy that prompted the decision to print and dis-
seminate the Confession.

The results of my research hypothesis and the investigation I
conducted suggest that the first editions of the Confession – which
include only 35 articles out of 40 and bear the date 1559 on their
frontispieces – were abridged versions of the ‘full’ Confession as
promulgated by the synod of Paris of 1559 (i.e. in 40 articles). The
‘full’ Confession was carefully revised for polemical purposes and
reasons of sheer political expediency. The decision to publish the
Confession in this particular fashion had a pragmatic and political
character, as opposed to purely religious or theological motives. In
the aftermath of the failure of the conspiracy of Amboise (March
1560), leading French Reformed ministers and lay activists – in-
cluding Antoine de Chandieu, Nicolas des Gallars, Jean le Mac¸on,
and Franc¸ois Hotman – decided to make a shrewd political at-
tempt to rally popular support against the Guise family. The ex-
punction of some articles from the text of the full Gallican Con-
fession and, crucially, the incorporation of an astute polemical pre-
face authored by Chandieu were carefully-planned devices which
made the Confession intelligible to the broadest possible audience.
This strategy – entailing the dissemination of an articulate ‘poly-
ptych’ of political and religious pamphlets printed simultaneously
– was put into place in an effort to counterbalance the influence
that Franc¸ois, duke of Guise and his younger brother Charles, car-

3 Franc¸ois Morel to John Calvin (5 June 1559), in: CO 17, 540.
4 Gianmarco Braghi, Between Paris and Geneva: Some Remarks on the Approval of
the Gallican Confession (May 1559), in: Journal of Early Modern Christianity 5/2
(2018), 218f.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

47

dinal of Lorraine had managed to attain at court after the sudden
death of Henri II. In particular one abridged edition of the Gallican
Confession in the vernacular, printed in Strasbourg in spring 1560,
was probably conceived as the pivot around which all the other
contemporary anti-Guise treatises turned and as the finest piece of
this ‘polyptych’. We will also comment upon a 1561 edition of the
Confession – apparently the first dated edition to feature 40 arti-
cles – which was ostensibly prepared with a view to the colloquy of
Poissy.

The state of the art and the sources under scrutiny

Every single Reformed congregation in France was supposed to
abide by the Gallican Confession’s articles of faith. The preserva-
tion of the French Reformed church’s doctrinal uniformity deman-
ded prompt availability of a consistent and reliable version of this
quintessential document. Unlike the Ecclesiastical Discipline, the
Confession had to be adopted, not adapted, and its publication
“implied a degree of permanence”.5 Any amendment to the Con-
fession had to be sanctioned by the central governing body of the
Reformed church of France, i.e. the national synod. However, this
document circulated in different forms. Two in particular are well
known to scholars: one featuring 40 articles – i.e. the full Gallican
Confession – and one including only 35.

This ‘double circulation’ was increasingly perceived as an issue
by the leading Reformed ministers. In 1565, during the national
synod of Paris, the brethren assembled admonished printers – in-
cluding Genevan printers – to attach the full Gallican Confession,
as opposed to the 35-article version, to their editions of the Psalms
and catechisms, “even though they are both suitable enough in
[terms of] doctrine”.6 This synodal decision failed to resolve the

5 Sara K. Barker, Protestantism, Poetry and Protest: The Vernacular Writings of
Antoine de Chandieu (c.1534–1591), Aldershot 2009 (St Andrews Studies in Refor-
mation History), 66.

6 Jean Aymon, Tous les synodes nationaux des e´glises re´forme´es de France… [Ay-
mon], vol. 1, The Hague 1710, 69. John Quick, Synodicon in Gallia Reformata…
[Quick], vol. 1, London 1692, 66.

48

Gianmarco Braghi

issue and it was eventually decided to take remedial action. In
1571 in La Rochelle it was decided to officialise one of the two
commonly-used versions of the Confession, “given that our Con-
fession of Faith is printed in different fashions”. The Gallican Con-
fession as promulgated in Paris in 1559 (i.e. in 40 articles) had to
be adopted by every single French Reformed congregation.7

Scholars in this field are well aware of the existence of these two
versions of the Confession. Hannelore Jahr’s Habilitationsschrift –
an outstanding and regrettably under-used bibliographical study of
the various editions of the Confession in the sixteenth century – is
the obvious starting point of our discussion.8 Jahr’s work lists
countless editions of this document, including known copies in 35
articles, and provides detailed information on their archival loca-
tion. Nonetheless, it fails to answer a fundamental question: when
was the Gallican Confession first printed and what was the context
of this decision? Other scholars have prepared transcriptions and
critical editions of the Confession’s text, such as the editors of the
Calvini opera, Philip Schaff, Olivier Fatio, and Emidio Campi.9
However, none of these authors has tackled the issue of the Con-
fession’s first appearance in print. Experts in political history and
pamphleteering during the wars of religion, commenting upon the
French Reformed movement’s growing involvement in the public
sphere during these crucial years, have mainly focused on the buil-
ding of a coherent narrative of key political events from a broad
national perspective and have not offered any significant insight on
the use of the Gallican Confession in the wider Reformed political
strategy.10 Herman A. Speelman has speculated that Calvin himself

7 Aymon, vol. 1, 98; Quick, vol. 1, 91.
8 Hannelore Jahr, Studien zur Überlieferungsgeschichte der Confession de foi von
1559, Neukirchen 1964 (Beiträge zur Geschichte und Lehre der Reformierten Kirche
16).

9 CO, vol. 9 (1870), 741–752; La confession de foi des e´glises re´forme´es de France,
dite Confession de La Rochelle, in: Confessions et cate´chismes de la foi re´forme´e, ed.
Olivier Fatio, Geneva 22005 (Publications de la Faculte´ de the´ologie de l’Universite´ de
Gene`ve 11), 111–127; Philip Schaff, The Creeds of Christendom, with a History and
Critical Notes, vol. 3, New York 1877, 356–382; Emidio Campi, Confessio Gallicana,
1559/1571, mit dem Bekenntnis der Waldenser, 1560, in: Reformierte Bekenntnis-
schriften, eds. Andreas Mühling and Peter Opitz, vol. 2/1, Neukirchen-Vluyn 2009,
1–56.

10 See among others Mack P. Holt, The French Wars of Religion, 1562–1629, Cam-

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

49

might have been behind the printing of the Confession in the wake
of Henri II’s sudden death and Catherine de Medici’s ‘emergency
regency’. However, this argument – although very much reasona-
ble – is mostly based on his analysis of the prefaces to the Confes-
sion and on the political conjuncture of 1559.11 Speelman has cor-
rectly remarked that external evidence on the exact timing of the
printing of the Gallican Confession has “not yet been found”.12

On the other hand, experts in the early French Reformed church
have obliquely engaged the problem of the existence of copies of
the Gallican Confession in 35 articles. The consensus seems to be
that the issue of the Confession’s ‘double circulation’ is connected
to its approval during the 1559 synod of Paris. In particular, Ber-
nard Roussel and Jean-Robert Armogathe have hypothesised that
the version in 35 articles could embody the draft confession that
Calvin allegedly sent to the Parisian synod for approval in May
1559, while the Gallican Confession in 40 articles might be the
product of the modifications implemented by the pastors assem-
bled in Paris.13 However, as I have recently suggested, there is no
solid evidence that the existence of variants in the printed editions
of the Gallican Confession could be traced back to the process
leading to the adoption of this document in 1559 by the synod of
Paris.14

bridge 22005 (New Approaches to European History 36); Histoire et dictionnaire des
guerres de religion, eds. Arlette Jouanna et al., Paris 1998; Robert J. Knecht, The French
Wars of Religion, 1559–1598, Harlow 32010 (Seminar Studies in History); Pierre Mi-
quel, Les guerres de religion, Paris 1980; Hugues Daussy, Le parti huguenot. Chronique
d’une de´sillusion, Geneva 2014 (Travaux d’Humanisme et Renaissance 527); Luc Ra-
caut, Hatred in Print: Catholic Propaganda and Protestant Identity during the French
Wars of Religion, Aldershot 2002 (St Andrews Studies in Reformation History); Tatiana
Debbagi Baranova, A` coups de libelles. Une culture politique au temps des guerres de
religion (1562–1598), Geneva 2012 (Cahiers d’Humanisme et Renaissance 104).

11 Herman A. Speelman, Calvin and the Independence of the Church, Göttingen

2014 (Reformed Historical Theology 25), 143–207.
12 Speelman, Calvin and the Independence, 176.
13 Bernard Roussel, Le texte et les usages de la Confession de foi des E´ glises re´for-
me´es de France d’apre`s les Actes des Synodes nationaux, in: Cate´chismes et Confessions
de foi. Actes du XIIIe colloque du Centre d’histoire des re´formes et du protestantisme de
l’Universite´ de Montpellier, eds. Marie-Madeleine Fragonard and Michel Pe´ronnet,
Montpellier 1995, 31–60, esp. 31f.; Jean-Robert Armogathe, Quelques re´flexions sur la
Confession de foi de La Rochelle, in: Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de l’histoire du protestan-
tisme franc¸ais [BSHPF] 117/2 (1971), 201–213, esp. 202f.

14 Braghi, Between Paris and Geneva, 199f.

50

Gianmarco Braghi

Before commenting in detail upon the four copies of the Gallican
Confession which represent the core sources of this paper, it is
crucial to offer a methodological caveat to the reader. According
to the results of Jahr’s Studien – and my archival experience con-
firms her findings – no surviving printed copy of the full Gallican
Confession (i.e. in 40 articles) bears the date 1559 or 1560 on its
frontispiece. Several copies are in fact undated. Various French and
Genevan printers who published copies of the full Gallican Con-
fession throughout the 1560s seem to have started including the
publication date on the frontispiece from 1561 onwards. However,
it has often been implicitly assumed that several undated copies of
the Gallican Confession could have been printed in 1559 or 1560.
The main reason for this assumption is that these copies are in-
cluded in me´langes and recueils composed of various political and
religious pamphlets from 1559 and 1560, often bound in the
seventeenth century. Nevertheless, the completely arbitrary orde-
ring of the single items of those recueils does not reflect the his-
torical and chronological coherence of the documents included:
rather, it largely depends on the taste of those erudites and collec-
tors who used to own these sources and decided upon the order in
which they were bound together. In methodological terms, there is
no rationale to assume that any specific undated copy of the Gal-
lican Confession could have been printed in 1559 or 1560, unless
solid evidence for such a claim can be provided – entailing pain-
staking work on fonts and blocks to trace out the printer.

Among the copies of the Gallican Confession in 35 articles,
Jahr’s study mentions four surviving copies dated 1559. Three are
in French and one is in Latin. Of the copies in French, one is held
in Zurich and one in Paris; the third one, once held in Grenoble, is
now lost.15 The copy in Latin is also held in Zurich. These copies
are believed to have been published by Genevan printer Conrad
Badius.16 Although Badius did print the Zurich copy in Latin and

15 I contacted the Bibliothe`que Municipale de Grenoble and it appears that shelf-
mark D. 7561, corresponding to Jahr, Studien, 94, item no. 49, is nowhere to be found.
There is also a copy of the Confession in 35 articles not included in Jahr’s list. It was
held in the former Prussian State Library, Berlin (shelfmark DF 9348), which was
evacuated during the Second World War. This is now in the Rossijskaja Gosudarstven-
naja Biblioteka, Moscow. I would like to thank Eva Rothkirch (Abteilung Historische
Drucke, Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin) for this piece of information.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

51

the Paris copy in French, I will show that the Zurich copy in
French was published in Strasbourg, not in Geneva. I will also
avail of a third source, i.e. the earliest edition of the full Gallican
Confession (i.e. in 40 articles) bearing a date on its frontispiece,
which was printed in 1561.

For the sake of brevity and clarity, I will henceforth use short

titles as shown below:

Confession par les Eglises (Strasbourg)

CONFESSION de foy, faicte d’vn com-mun accord par les Eglises qui
sont dispersees en France, & sabstiene¯t des idolatries Papales.
[fleuron]
AVEC VNE PREFACE CONTENANT responce & defence contre les
calumnies dont on les charge [fleuron] M. D. LIX.
Zentralbibliothek Zürich, Ms S 95, 24 (Dr 8).
Online at 〈http://doi.org/10.3931/e-rara–1899〉. Jahr, Studien, 94, item no.
50. In 35 articles.

Confession par les Eglises (Geneva)

CONFESSION DE FOY, FAITE D’VN COMMVN AC-cord par les Egli-
ses qui sont dis-persees en France, & s’abstie-nent des idolatries Papales. 3
AVEC VNE PREFACE CONTENANT response & defense contre les ca-
lomnies dont on les charge.
Bibliothe`que nationale de France, Re´serve D. 6766. Jahr, Studien, 94, item
no. 48. In 35 articles.

[fleuron] M. D. LIX.

Confessio fidei communi ecclesiarum

CONFESSIO FIDEI COMMVNI ECCLESIARVM, QVAE sparsae sunt in
Gallia, consensu facta, quaequidem ab idololatria Papistica se abstinent.
CVM PRAEFATIONE QVAE CONTI-net Apologiam aduersus calumnias
quibus impetuntur.
Zentralbibliothek Zürich, III Q 380, 2.
Online at 〈http://doi.org/10.3931/e-rara–1255〉. Jahr, Studien, 95, item no.
51. In 35 articles.

[fleuron] M. D. LIX.

16 According to the bibliographical

information provided by the host website
〈www.e-rara.ch〉 in the permalinks of these digitalisations (last accessed 21 June 2019).

52

Gianmarco Braghi

Confession par les Franc¸ois

CONFESSION DE FOY, FAITTE D’VN COMMVN ACCORD PAR
LES FRANCOIS,
[fleuron] Qui desirent viure selon la purete´ de l’Eu-
angile de nostre Seigneur IESUS CHRIST. I. PIERRE III. Soyez tousiours
appareillez a` respondre a` chacun qui vous demande raison de l’esperance
qui est en vous. M D LXI.
Bibliothe`que nationale de France, Re´serve D2. 4234 (2).
Online at 〈https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k5477765t〉. Jahr, Studien,
95, item no. 53 (various other copies). In 40 articles.

It is important to underline that all known copies in 35 articles
bear the title of Confession de foy, faicte d’un commun accord par
les Eglises qui sont dispersees en France, & sabstiennent des ido-
latries Papales. The Latin copy has the same title translated into
Latin. On the other hand, the full Gallican Confession was printed
under the title of Confession de foy, faitte d’un commun accord
par les Franc¸ois qui desirent vivre selon la purete´ de l’Evangile.

As stated above, the copy of the Confession in 35 articles in
Latin presently held in Zurich was printed in Conrad Badius’
workshop in Geneva. The ornate letters E and Q in the Confessio
fidei communi ecclesiarum are also found in a Genevan work prin-
ted by Conrad Badius and Artus Chauvin. Likewise, the copy of
the Confession par les Eglises (Geneva) in the vernacular was also
printed in Badius’ workshop: its ornate letters C and P belonged to
this successful Genevan printer.

These two Genevan editions of the Gallican Confession did not
leave any traces in the town records. As The´ophile Dufour’s re-
search suggests, there is no reference to any edition of the Gallican
Confession in the records of the Small Council of Geneva for the
years 1559–1572.17 Genevan printers often exchanged blocks bet-
ween themselves in order to fool censors when it came to editions
that could cause issues with the civil authorities.18 However, this

17 The´ophile Dufour, Extraits des Registres du Conseil et Registres du Consistoire
relatifs aux imprimeurs, 1542–1600, Bibliothe`que de Gene`ve, Ms Fr 3817. However,
several editions of Psalms and of Bibles printed in Geneva include the Gallican Confes-
sion at the beginning or at the end of the volumes.

18 Theodore G. van Raalte, “Noster Theophilus”: The Fictitious “Printer” whose
Anti-Jesuit Volumes Issued from Various Presses in Geneva between 1580 and 1589, in:
Bibliothe`que d’Humanisme et Renaissance 74/3 (2012), 569–591.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

53

Block in Confessio ﬁ dei communi 
ecclesiarum, 3. Cf. L’histoire ecclesias-
tique, proposant l’entiere et vraye forme 
de l’eglise de nostre Seigneur Iesus…, 
Geneva: [Conrad Badius] Imprimé pour 
Artus Chauvin, 1560, 141.

Block in Confessio ﬁ dei communi eccle-
siarum, 26. Cf. L’histoire ecclesiastique, 
proposant l’entiere et vraye forme, 119.

Block in Confession par les Eglises 
(Geneva), 3. Cf. Michel Cop, Sur les 
proverbes de Salomon exposition 
familiere en forme de briefves Homilies, 
contenant plusieurs sainctes exhorta-
tions convenables au temps present..., 
[Geneva]: Imprimé par Conrad Badius, 
1559, fol. A2r.

Block in Confession par les Eglises 
(Geneva), 29. Cf. Jean Calvin, Sermons 
de Iean Calvin sur les deux Epistres S. 
Paul a Timothee, & sur l’Epistre a Tite, 
Imprimé à Genève par Conrad Badius, 
1559, fol. A1r.

was not the case of Badius’ editions of the Confession, as he de-
cided to use his own ornate letters . His books were well known in
town and it would have been rather unwise to put detectable
blocks in editions not previously submitted to the Genevan au-
thorities’ inspection. By printing an unauthorised edition of such a

54

Gianmarco Braghi

document – potentially very dangerous for the Genevan magis-
trates in diplomatic terms – Badius risked seeing his advantageous
contract terminated.19 It is likely that Badius had the Small Coun-
cil’s tacit endorsement and that the Venerable Company of Pastors
itself hired Badius, upon informal approval from the Small Coun-
cil, to print these abridged editions of the Gallican Confession.
However, I am persuaded that these Genevan copies did not cir-
culate immediately and remained safely stored in Badius’ work-
shop while waiting for the best moment to disseminate them. I will
expand on my point of view below.

Before addressing the context in which the Confession was cir-
culated, it is worthwhile to offer some remarks on the last 35-ar-
ticles copy under scrutiny. This copy was not printed in Geneva
but in Strasbourg, in the workshop of Christian Müller (Mylius).
Mylius – not by chance – also printed Franc¸ois Hotman’s Epistre
au Tigre de la France in the very same months.20

The chronological proximity of Valentinus Erythraeus’ edition
dispels any doubts that Mylius could have sold his blocks C and P
in the meantime. Analysis will show that Mylius’ Strasbourg edi-
tion was most probably a reprise of the Genevan editions and
appeared around spring 1560.

19 Badius was imprisoned in January 1560 for failing to ask permission to publish a
satirical pamphlet authored by Beza but printed anonymously. Cf. Theodore Beza,
Satyres chrestiennes de la cuisine papale, ed. Charles-Antoine Chamay, Geneva 2005
(Textes litte´raires franc¸ais 576), lvi.

20 Rodolphe Peter, Les premiers ouvrages franc¸ais imprime´s a` Strasbourg, in: An-
nuaire de la Socie´te´ des Amis du Vieux-Strasbourg 8 (1978), 30–31. Christian Mylius,
active in Strasbourg between 1555 and 1568, had probably inherited both the work-
shop of Crato Mylius (ostensibly a relative) and of his father-in-law Jacob Frölich.
Crato studied at the University of Wittenberg and knew Philip Melanchthon personally.
He was a fervent Protestant and was in close contact with several Alsatian and German
Protestant circles. After Crato’s death, printer Blaise Fabricius married his widow.
Christian Mylius, who in turn kept good relationships with the local Protestant milieu,
later inherited Fabricius’ workshop. Christian Mylius I, in: Histoire de l’imprimerie
alsacienne aux XVe et XVIe sie`cles, ed. Franc¸ois Ritter, Strasbourg and Paris 1955,
251–258; Die Buchdrucker des 16. und 17. Jahrhunderts im deutschen Sprachgebiet /
Auf der Grundlage des gleichnamigen Werkes von Josef Benzing, ed. Christoph Reske,
Wiesbaden 2007 (Beiträge zum Buch- und Bibliothekswesen 51), 891.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

55

Block in Confession par les Eglises 
(Strasbourg), 3. Cf. Valentinus Ery-
thraeus, Tabulae partitionum oratoria-
rum Ciceronis: & quatuor dialogorum 
Ioan. Sturmii in easdem: recognitae, 
& alicubi auctae…, Argentorati apud 
Christianum Mylium, 1560, fol. H3v.

Block in Confession par les Eglises 
(Strasbourg), 29. Cf. Erythraeus, Tabu-
lae partitionum, fol. A2r.

Context: the Guise family, the failed coup at

Amboise, and the Strasbourg connection

In the introduction we have seen how, notwithstanding all the
surprise and hope that the sudden death of Henri II may have
triggered in the hearts of the French Reformed believers in July
1559, the leading ministers and activists were wise enough not to
immediately embark on the risky adventure of printing the Galli-
can Confession. Although the policy of pleading with Henri II
through handwritten apologies had ultimately failed, it was not
taken for granted that the very same conduct could not win over
Henri’s adolescent successor Franc¸ois II and the queen mother Ca-
therine de Medici. Nevertheless, the leading Reformed ministers’
hopes were rapidly frustrated by the position of power that the
Guise family had managed to attain at court and by their decision
to keep up persecution against heretics, in continuity with the po-
licy put in place in the late years of Henri II’s reign.21

21 On the Guises, see Stuart Carroll, Martyrs and Murderers: The Guise Family and
the Making of Europe, Oxford 2009; Silvia Castro Shannon, The Political Activity of
Franc¸ois de Lorraine, duc de Guise (1559–1563): From Military Hero to Catholic Lea-
der, Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Boston University 1988.

56

Gianmarco Braghi

The context of the late-1559 persecution wave in Paris – which
led the Parisian pastors to a desperate search for refuge abroad – is
still obscure, also due to the fragmentary nature of surviving
sources. Plans for transferring the whole Parisian congregation to
Strasbourg and for organising a full-fledged exodus from the king-
dom of France were made between late 1559 and early 1560.22 I
have engaged elsewhere with the minutiae of persecution in Paris
and with the Reformed response to it.23 For the purpose of this
paper, it will be sufficient to say that there were intense triangular
contacts between Paris, Geneva, and Strasbourg, which were key
to the organisation of political opposition to the Guises as well as
to the coordination of informal networks of relief from persecu-
tion. The intermittent presence in Strasbourg of Jean le Mac¸on,
Antoine de Chandieu, Nicolas des Gallars, Franc¸ois Hotman, and
Theodore Beza between the second half of 1559 and the first half
of 1560 helps explain how several Reformed political and religious
pamphlets – disseminated after the failure of the conspiracy of
Amboise (March 1560) – were printed simultaneously in Stras-
bourg: that is, safely outside the borders of the kingdom of France.
The anti-Guise plot leading to the attempted seizure of the castle
of Amboise has attracted a considerable deal of scholarly attention
and is well researched.24 It is key to underline here that the con-
spiracy’s short-term result was not to unseat the Guises from their
position of power at court. On the contrary, Franc¸ois II appointed
the duke of Guise lieutenant-general of the kingdom for his success
in defending the castle of Amboise. Not only did the king confirm
Franc¸ois de Guise in the same position of power as before: crucial-

22 Barker, Protestantism, 22; Auguste Bernus, Le ministre Antoine de Chandieu

d’apre`s son journal autographe ine´dit, 1534–1591, in: BSHPF 37/1 (1888), 67.

23 Braghi, The Evolving Character of

the French Reformed Movement,
c.1555–c.1572, Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Trinity College Dublin 2016, Chapter III. I
plan to publish a monograph based on my thesis before the end of 2020.

24 On Amboise, see Henri Naef, La conjuration d’Amboise et Gene`ve, Geneva and
Paris 1922; Lucien Romier, La conjuration d’Amboise; l’aurore sanglante de la liberte´
de conscience; le re`gne et la mort de Franc¸ois II, Paris 1923; Robert M. Kingdon,
Geneva and the Coming of the Wars of Religion in France, Geneva 22007 (E´ tudes de
Philologie et d’Histoire 82), 68–76; Corrado Vivanti, La congiura d’Amboise, in: Com-
plots et conjurations dans l’Europe moderne. Actes du colloque international organise´ a`
Rome, 30 septembre – 2 octobre 1993, eds. Yves-Marie Berce´ and Elena Fasano
Guarini, Rome 1996 (Publications de l’E´ cole Franc¸aise de Rome 220), 439–450.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

57

ly, he also authorised him to prosecute as he pleased those among
the conspirators who had managed to escape the slaughter.25 As a
result, the climate of renewed persecution in the months between
March and May 1560 ended up triggering a stiff reaction by the
French Reformed leading pastors and lay activists. From their pro-
visional ‘headquarters’ in Strasbourg and in close contact with
Geneva, they produced a ‘polyptych’ of political and religious an-
ti-Guise propaganda between spring and summer 1560.

Some anti-Guise pamphlets printed in Strasbourg in 1560 are
well known, such as Franc¸ois Hotman’s Epistre au Tigre de la
France and the Histoire du tumulte d’Amboyse.26 Many others are
still obscure and need to be put in the context of the failed coup,
such as a short consolatory tract titled Traicte´ de la croix et afflic-
tion des enfans de Dieu, now surviving in a unique copy held in
Archbishop Marsh’s Library, Dublin.27 As we have seen above, an
abridged edition of the Gallican Confession in the vernacular, in-
cluding a long polemical preface authored by Antoine de Chan-
dieu, was among the pamphlets printed in Strasbourg.28 Such a
central and significant piece was certainly designed as the pivot
around which all the other polemical pamphlets – not by chance
printed in more than one workshop – revolved.29 According to
Charles Read, Franc¸ois Hotman’s Epistre au Tigre was published

25 Shannon, The Political Activity, 140f. The lieutenant-general had full command

of the royal army.

26 Le Tigre de 1560 reproduit pour la premie`re fois en fac-simile d’apre`s l’unique
exemplaire connu (qui a e´chappe´ a` l’incendie de l’Hoˆ tel de Ville en 1871) et publie´ avec
des notes historiques, litte´raires et bibliographiques, ed. Charles Read, Paris 1875;
[Franc¸ois Hotman], L’histoire du tumulte d’Amboyse advenu au moys de Mars,
M.D.LX. Ensemble, Un avertissement & une complainte au peuple Franc¸ois, s.l. [Stras-
bourg]: s.n. [Jean Nesle] 1560, Bibliothe`que nationale de France, LB32.15.

27 Traicte´ de la croix et affliction des enfans de Dieu, utile a` tous, pour le temps de
persecution…, Strasbourg: s.n., 1560, Archbishop Marsh’s Library, Class. R. 4, Tab. 7,
16 (5). A 1563 edition is held in the Bibliothe`que de Rennes-Me´tropole (85180/10). I
am currently writing a paper focusing on this rare publication.

28 The title itself, describing the French Reformed churches as ‘disperses’, also al-
luded to times of persecution. In fact, one of the meanings of ‘dispers’ and ‘disperse´’ can
be ‘in trouble’, ‘disbanded’. See Edmond Huguet, Dictionnaire de la langue franc¸aise du
XVIe sie`cle, vol. 3, Paris 21946, 210 (entry ‘Dispars’, ‘Disparser’), 213f. (entries ‘Dis-
perdre 1’, ‘Disperdre 2’), 214 (entries ‘Dispers’, ‘Disperser’).

29 The fact that more than one printer in Strasbourg was hired to publish these
pamphlets shows that these tracts were meant to appear simultaneously and to be read
as a body of work rather than a collection of isolated pieces.

58

Gianmarco Braghi

around the end of May or the beginning of June.30 The key piece of
correspondence analysed below was written shortly before the
Epistre au Tigre was published, and this makes the chronological
proximity of the Tigre and the abridged Confession not accidental.

A secret laid bare

On 16 May 1560 Nicolas des Gallars, while en route to the French
refugee church of London,31 wrote a dispatch to Calvin. Here des
Gallars informed Calvin of a conversation he had had with Chan-
dieu and others not long before in Strasbourg. This letter’s oblique
expressions suggest that it was deliberately written in coded lan-
guage. Even the nineteenth-century editors of the Calvini opera,
customarily prolific and precise when it came to providing
references, did not offer any information on the broader context of
this message or any clues about its possible meaning. Let us now
analyse closely an excerpt from this letter.

“As soon as I arrived in Strasbourg, I discussed with Chandieu about what
we had pondered [in Geneva]. He appeared to be ready for anything you
command. He only objected that it would not have been licit for him to
take up such a task without the church of Paris’ explicit instruction. We had
already anticipated [his objection]: I answered that you will ask the Pari-
sians to do this. In fact, [Chandieu] said, ‘I gave them my word that, unless
I had written proof of their endorsement – in case somebody wanted to
calumniate me – I would not entrust this labour to others’. For this reason,
it is convenient that you warn the Parisians. And I do not doubt that they
will easily grant their approval if they understand how beneficial [Chan-
dieu’s plan] would be for them. After this conversation, [Jean Le Mac¸on]
arrived on cue in this town [from Paris]. He said he had expected [Chan-
dieu’s objection]. […] Le Mac¸on easily acquiesced and brought forth no
reason why Chandieu should forsake this undertaking. He said that this
must be pointed out to the church of Paris. Then I asked that [Le Mac¸on]
wrote and pointed this out, which he will do. Nonetheless, it is [the Ve-
nerable Company of Pastors of Geneva and yourself] who should write to

30 See the introduction of Read, LeTigre de 1560.
31 On the French refugee church of London, see above all Fernand de Schickler, Les
e´glises du refuge en Angleterre, 3 vols., Paris 1892. See also Andrew Pettegree, Foreign
Protestant Communities in Sixteenth-Century London, Oxford 1986.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

59

further persuade the Parisians with your authority. I told this to [Guillau-
me] Houbraque: he incited [Chandieu], who was ever so self-motivated.”32

This dispatch includes at least three vital pieces of information
which must be considered separately to fully grasp their meaning
and allusions in context.

First, Chandieu was supposed to take upon himself a task of
such importance that des Gallars refrained from being any more
specific in his letter to Calvin. Perhaps des Gallars feared that this
dispatch would be too incriminating had it been seized by French
civil authorities. Thus, he decided to conceal what he was writing
about. Besides, Calvin, Chandieu, and des Gallars had already dis-
cussed the affair face to face in Geneva.33 Thus, there was no need
to be any more explicit than des Gallars was, as Calvin knew
exactly what the coded language of this dispatch referred to.

Second, according to his biographer Jacques Lect, Chandieu had
written his preface to the Gallican Confession in or even before
1559.34 In the light of this crucial detail, the support that des Gal-
lars, Le Mac¸on, Houbraque, and others offered to Chandieu is
remarkable. Insofar as known sources are concerned, this docu-
ment had remained unpublished until the abridged editions in 35
articles were printed in Strasbourg and Geneva. However, the lea-

32 Nicolas des Gallars to John Calvin (16 May 1560), in: CO, vol. 18 (1878), 91f.:
“Simul atque Argentinam veni egi cum Rochio de eo quod inter nos deliberatum erat. Is
se ad omnia quae iuberetis promptum ac paratum esse ostendit. Tantum excepit quod
iam satis a nobis praevisum erat sibi ecclesiae Parisiensis iniussu munus ullum suscipere
non licere. Respondi vos de ea re Parisiensibus satisfacturos. Sic vero, inquit, fidem illis
meam obstrinxi, ut nisi assentiantur ac scripto eorum assensum probare possim, iis qui
me calumniari vellent, aliis operam daturus non sim. Quamobrem opus est ut ipsi a
vobis moneantur. Nec dubito quin, si intellexerint quantum profuturus sit iis quibus
designatur, facile assensum praebeant. Postquam ita colloquuti sumus, accessit ad hanc
urbem peropportune Rivierius, quem se exspectare dicebat. […] Is facile assensus est,
nec ullam attulit causam cur Rochius hoc munus detrectare deberet. Tantum id ecclesiae
Parisiensi significandum esse dixit. Rogavi igitur ut scriberet ipse ac quam primum
significaret. Quod se facturum recepit. Sed nihilominus a vobis scribendum erit ut Pa-
risienses magis autoritate vestra moveantur. Hoc ipsum cum Holbracho communicavi,
qui hominem, quamvis per se incitatum, adhuc impellebat.”

33 Chandieu visited Geneva early in 1560. Naef, La conjuration d’Amboise et Ge-

ne`ve, passim.

34 De vita Anton. Sadeelis et scriptis, in: Jacques Lect, Antonii Sadeelis Chandei

nobilissimi viri opera theologica, Geneva 1599, fol. ¶¶¶. 2r.

60

Gianmarco Braghi

ding Reformed pastors and activists were certainly aware of Chan-
dieu’s authorship of this polemical piece, as it was probably cir-
culated to a very restricted audience. Chandieu’s anxieties can be
fully explained if we assume that this dispatch is about the printing
and dissemination of Mylius’ edition of the Confession.

Third, des Gallars’ dispatch mentions Chandieu’s fear of calum-
nies, had he accomplished his task without securing the Parisian
congregation’s written approval. After all, not only did Paris host
the most significant Reformed congregation across the kingdom of
France: crucially, it was the venue of the first national synod, ce-
lebrated less than a year before. Moreover, the 1557 letter-confes-
sion Au Roy had served as the confession of faith of the church of
Paris before it became the full Gallican Confession.35 There is no
evidence that the Parisians saw the Gallican Confession as their
‘private property’. However, this dispatch glows with the leading
ministers’ perception of the Parisian church as a body whose en-
dorsement had to be sought when it came to such important mat-
ters for the Reformed movement of France as a whole. As other
Reformed ministers and activists were aware that Chandieu’s hand
was behind the preface, the choice of expunging or condensing
some articles would have been his own responsibility had he failed
to seek written approval from Paris and Geneva. The removal of
crucial articles without both Geneva’s and Paris’ sanction could
possibly lead to accusations of doctrinal deviance or of
disobedience. Chandieu’s uncertainties were certainly connected to
the Parisian Reformed notables’ awareness of their increasingly
important role in the larger French Reformed movement, as well as
to the weight of the first national synod’s decision not to disse-
minate the Confession. In May 1560, Chandieu was unwilling to
take upon himself the full responsibility for such a crucial choice
before obtaining the broadest possible approval. However, Gene-
van support had already been secured, and pastor Jean Le Mac¸on,
who had arrived – in des Gallars’ words, “on cue” – in Strasbourg
from the congregation of Paris which he served, agreed that time
had eventually come for a major, unconcealed debut in the poli-
tical arena of France.36

35 Glenn S. Sunshine, Reforming French Protestantism: The Development of Hu-
guenot Ecclesiastical Institutions, Kirksville 2003 (Sixteenth Century Essays and Studies
66), 16.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

61

1559: a false date?

The frontispiece of the Strasbourg edition of the Gallican Confes-
sion in 35 articles technically bears a false date. However, it is
possible that the motives behind this deliberate choice by the
French Reformed pastors and lay activists who promoted this edi-
torial effort were mostly practical, and that this is ultimately a
reprise of the frontispiece of the Genevan editions, ostensibly prin-
ted slightly earlier.

A letter sent by Calvin to Peter Martyr Vermigli on 11 May 1560
mentions a printed confession of faith. After providing an account
of the failed conspiracy of Amboise, Calvin stated that Louis de
Conde´ had planned to offer Franc¸ois II the Gallican Confession
himself: Conde´ had “[…] decided that he would offer the king the
Confession that was printed here [in Geneva]. If the Guises im-
prisoned or incriminated him for this, many would have been re-
ady to defend him”.37 The Latin wording “apud nos” suggests that
Calvin referred either to the Confession par les Eglises (Geneva) or
to the Confessio fidei communi ecclesiarum, both printed in Gene-
va.38 This implies that these Genevan copies were completed in
good time for Conde´ to offer one to the king during the (attemp-
ted) seizure of the castle of Amboise on 17 March 1560.39 Accor-
ding to the modern calendar, these Genevan editions were most
probably achieved between the final months of 1559 and February
1560 – still in 1559 in the ab incarnatione dating style.40 However,

36 Late in May 1560, printed copies of the Confession were sent to the parlements of
Rouen and Rennes and to the seneschal of Rennes. However, it is unclear whether these
printed copies featured 35 articles. See Philip Benedict and Nicolas Fornerod, Les de´-
pute´s des e´glises re´forme´es a` la cour en 1561–1562, in: Revue historique 315/2 (2013),
289–332, here 293 and the sources and literature cited therein.

37 John Calvin to Peter Martyr Vermigli (11 May 1560), in: CO 18, 82: “Sic enim
convenerat: ut confessionem quae edita est apud nos Regi offerret: si Guisiani vim
afferent vel eius factum traherent in crimen, parati essent ad eius defensionem quam
plurimi.”

38 The verb e¯do¯ –ere in this context may have several meanings, as I have discussed in
Braghi, Between Paris and Geneva, 207, note 38. Contextual evidence suggests that
Calvin was using this verb in its ‘technical’ meaning, i.e. related to the printing press.
39 Conde´’s plan ultimately failed as none of the conspirators managed to get as close

to the king as to offer him the Confession.

40 This holds true also for the Easter dating style, as Easter 1560 was celebrated on
14 April. Cf. Adriano Cappelli, Cronologia, cronografia e calendario perpetuo. Dal
principio dell’era cristiana fino ai nostri giorni, ed. Marino Vigano` , Milan 72012, 82f.

62

Gianmarco Braghi

as stated above, they remained safely stored in Badius’ workshop,
ready to be disseminated.

The 1559 date on the frontispiece of the Confession par les Egli-
ses (Strasbourg) is most probably a reprise of the frontispiece of
the Confession par les Eglises (Geneva), as the wording of the title
and the preface are identical. This choice ought to be read both as
a tribute to the authority of the 1559 synod of Paris – which pro-
mulgated the Gallican Confession – and as a guarantee for the
readers that the printing of the Confession stemmed directly from
that same authority – especially because it was not the ‘full’ Gal-
lican Confession (i.e. in 40 articles), even if only the movers and
shakers of the Reformed movement knew this. In the first ‘official’
printed edition of such a key document for the French Reformed
church as a whole, it was far more important to refer to the date of
its promulgation than to the date of its printing – also because a
year had elapsed between the synod of Paris and the broad disse-
mination of the first printed copies of the Confession.

Secondly, but no less importantly, the pastors and lay activists
who took care of the printing of the Strasbourg edition had the
machinery of censorship of the kingdom of France very much in
mind. If the French authorities intercepted copies of Mylius’ edi-
tion, the 1559 date on the frontispiece would have conveyed the
impression that this document had been circulating for months,
unbeknown to them. In other words, censors might be fooled into
thinking that it was too late to forestall the dissemination of the
Confession. It was crucial not to worsen persecution in such tes-
ting times, and even the smallest detail – such as a false date on a
frontispiece – could help. On 23 June, a printer named Martin
Lhomme was arrested in Paris and executed under suspicion of
being the publisher of the Tigre. Apparently, he had some copies of
this pamphlet stored in his workshop. However, according to the
edict of Romorantin (7 May 1560), affirming one’s faith without
any obvious seditious intentions (as in the abridged Confession)
could not be punished as harshly as stirring political sedition (as in
the Tigre).41 The promulgation of the edict of Romorantin could
be one of the triggers of this sudden shift in the Reformed political

41 Shannon, The Political Activity, 171–174.

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

63

strategy and of the decision to disseminate the Confession with
Chandieu’s preface.42

Sources suggest that Mylius’ edition of the Gallican Confession
circulated immediately and that its publication was not concealed.
For example, in the Histoire du tumulte d’Amboyse, also printed
in Strasbourg in 1560, the anonymous author explicitly mentioned
a “printed Confession of faith”.43 A copy of the Confession was
also offered to the king at the so-called Assembly of Notables of
Fontainebleau in August 1560.44 At the provincial synod of Gu-
yenne, held in Clairac on 19 November 1560, the delegates (de´-
pute´s) representing the Reformed movement at the upcoming es-
tates-general of Orle´ans were asked to “[…] offer our king the
Confession of faith agreed upon by the churches scattered in Fran-
ce that abstain from papal idolatries, including an apology and
defense against the calumnies they are charged with […]”.45 Com-
parison of the Clairac synodal records with the frontispieces of
both the Confession par les e´glises (Geneva) and the Confession
par les e´glises (Strasbourg) shows that the wording is exactly the
same. The delegates to the synod of Clairac could have either of

42 Romorantin was promulgated on 7 May and des Gallars’ letter to Calvin (ana-

lysed above) was written on 16 May.

43 [Hotman], L’histoire du tumulte d’Amboyse, 11: “[…] ils ont declaire´ ouverte-
ment ce qu’ils sentent de l’obeissance deue¨ aux Roys, & autres Principautez, par le
dernier article de leur confession de foy imprimee, ou il est contenu qu’on doit fran-
chement & de bonne volonte´ porter le ioug des Roys & Princes, encores qu’ils fussent
infideles.” It is evident that this reference to the printed Confession was carefully placed
in the text of this pamphlet to advertise the Strasbourg edition to the interested reader.
44 Deux requestes de la part des fideles de France, qui desirent vivre selon la refor-
mation de l’Evangile, donnees pour presenter au Conseil tenu a` Fontainebleau au mois
d’Aoust, M.D.L.X., s.l.: s.n. [but 1560], Bibliothe`que de la Socie´te´ de l’histoire du
protestantisme franc¸ais, Fonds Andre´ 663, fol. A1v.: “[…] la Foy que nous tenons est
celle mesme qui est comprinse au Symbole des Apostres, comme il appert assez claire-
ment par nostre Confession qui vous a este´ par cy devant presentee.”

45 Actes du Sinode de Clairac celebre´ l’an MVcLX et le XIXe jour de novembre par
trente ministres, oultre les diacres et anciens et plusieurs autres des Eglizes, in: L’or-
ganisation et l’action des e´glises re´forme´es de France (1557–1563). Synodes provinciaux
et autres documents, eds. Philip Benedict and Nicolas Fornerod, Geneva 2012 (Travaux
d’Humanisme et Renaissance 504), 12: “[…] presenter a` nostre Roy la Confession de
foy faite d’un commun accord par les Eglises qui sont disperse´es en France et s’ab-
stiennent des idolatries papalles, ensamble une apologie et deffence contre les calomnies
dont on les charge […].” On the Reformed de´pute´s at court, see Benedict and Fornerod,
Les de´pute´s des e´glises.

64

Gianmarco Braghi

the two editions under their eyes: after all, it is safe to assume that
by November 1560 the Genevan edition in 35 articles (Badius’)
had also been widely disseminated.

A sophisticated and shape-shifting

political manifesto

The abridgment and publication of 35-article editions of the Gal-
lican Confession leaves several questions unanswered. Why did
Chandieu, des Gallars, and other leading Reformed pastors deli-
berately choose to abridge this document by expunging elements
from, or condensing some articles of, the full Gallican Confession
they themselves had agreed upon and officialised in Paris in 1559?
Their choice hints at the broader political implications of the ca-
reful editing of these publications, with a view to both the verna-
cular and the Latin editions’ intended audiences.

The contents of the abridged editions did not diverge significant-
ly from the full Gallican Confession.46 Articles I and VI of the full
Confession were condensed in Article II of the abridged editions;
likewise, articles XXXIX and XL of the former became the final
Article XXXV in the latter. Three articles were completely left out
in the abridged editions, i.e. articles II, III and IV of the full Con-
fession. At a closer look, these are the articles most characterised
by theological subtleties.47 In the abridged editions’ text we can
also find remarkable alterations in tone. The relatively neutral re-
ference to the “assemblies of the Papacy” found in the full Con-
fession became a more judgmental “synagogues of the Papacy” in
the abridged editions,48 while the theologically-connoted word

46 The delegates to the synod of Paris (1565) declared that both versions were sui-

table in doctrinal terms. See note 5.

47 In the full Gallican Confession, Article II describes the manifestation of God
through works and through revelation; Article III lists the Biblical books included in the
Reformed canon; Article IV states that the choice of the books included in the Biblical
canon is not founded on human agreement or on tradition, but on the authority of the
Holy Ghost, which provides the discernment needed to distinguish canonical from non-
canonical books.

48 Cf. Campi, Confessio Gallicana, 25: “Pourtant nous condamnons les assemble´es
de la Papaute´ […]” and Confession par les e´glises (Strasbourg), 51: “Sur tout nous

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

65

“reprouve´z” (“those who are reprobate”) found in the full Con-
fession, was changed into the more nuanced expression “hypocri-
tes, blasphemers of God, and criminals”, perhaps to show their
French audience – high and lesser nobles as well as unpaid soldiers
and exhausted taxpayers of the kingdom – that the Reformed mo-
vement did care about civil order and was not into political sedi-
tion as the much-detested Anabaptists were.49 At the same time,
this hushed but decisive toning down of double-decree predesti-
nation was mirrored in the Latin edition, probably aimed at ag-
gregating and maximising intra-Protestant support at an interna-
tional level.50 The expunction of the word “sacramentaires” – a
derogative term for Zwinglians – from the text of the abridged
editions also spoke to these concerns.51

Broadly speaking, the audience of the abridged editions of the
Gallican Confession could virtually extend to all those in the king-
dom who could read French, or at least understand a relatively
simple political argument – i.e. Chandieu’s preface – had they nee-
ded somebody else to read a text out loud. This mostly non-erudite
audience certainly did not care much about subtleties for educated
humanists and theologians. Keeping long and complicated articles
in the text – such as Article III, expanding on the books included in
the Reformed Biblical canon – would have overloaded this pam-

detestons les synagogues de la Papaute´ […]”. See also Confessio fidei communi eccle-
siarum, 46: “In primis Papisticas synagogas abominamur […].”

49 Cf. Campi, Confessio Gallicana, 25: “Ne´antmoins nous ne nions point que parmi
les fide`les il n’y ait des hypocrites et re´prouve´z […]” and Confession par les e´glises
(Strasbourg), 51: “Neantmoins nous ne nions point que parmi les fideles il n’y ait des
hypocrites ou des contempteurs de Dieu, ou gens mal-vivans […].” See also Confessio
fidei communi ecclesiarum, 45: “[…] non inficiamur quin piis admixti sint hypocritae,
profani, flagitiosique homines […]”. The Guises were not responsible for the financial
disarray of the kingdom in the aftermath of the Habsburg-Valois wars, but the financial
measures they took caused widespread discontent. The intended audience of the
abridged versions of the Gallican Confession was not necessarily sympathetic to the
Reformation, but certainly had its reasons to object to the Guises’ rule.

50 I.e. the German-speaking cantons of the Swiss Confederation – especially Bern
and Zurich – as well as the German Lutheran princes who had supported the Reformed
cause in the aftermath of the rue Saint-Jacques affair in late 1557.

51 Cf. Campi, Confessio Gallicana, 28f.: “Et reiettons les fantastiques et sacramen-
taires qui ne veulent recevoir telz signes et marques […]” and Confession par les e´glises
(Strasbourg), 60: “Et reiettons les fantastiques, qui ne veulent recevoir tels signes &
marques […].” See also Confessio fidei communi ecclesiarum, 54: “Quo nomine fana-
ticos reciimus, qui eiusmodi signa nota´sque aspernantur […].”

66

Gianmarco Braghi

phlet with politically indifferent and lacklustre details. On top of
this, these complex articles appeared at the very beginning of the
Confession. Readers might as well have stopped reading altoge-
ther, thus nullifying the immediate purpose of this publication.
May 1560 was not the time for theological subtleties, but an oc-
casion to put an end to what was widely perceived as the ‘tyranny’
of the Guises.

The removal or condensation of some articles, as well as the
scrupulous and astute changes in the tone of some expressions
corroborates the hypothesis that this edition of the Confession was
conceived as a pivot for the ‘polyptych’ of pamphlets printed in
spring and summer 1560 in Strasbourg and elsewhere, such as the
Epistre au Tigre, the Histoire du tumulte d’Amboyse, and others.
This operation reveals the polemical (as opposed to strictly reli-
gious) need to print a compact version of the Gallican Confession
in the vernacular at this crucial political stage. I have analysed
elsewhere Chandieu’s complex preface to these editions:52 how-
ever, its clear anti-Guise features are further signs of the sheer
political expediency behind this crucial editorial choice.

The printing of the ‘full’ Gallican Confession

The first appearance of a reference to the full Gallican Confession
in the proceedings of the synods of the French Reformed churches
is found in the decisions of the provincial synod of Berry, held in
Sancerre from 21 to 23 April 1561. Here the delegates raised
doubts about the clarity of the Confession’s definition of the Bi-
blical canon, and proposed to specify which chapters of the book
of Esther and of the book of Daniel were deemed canonical:

“On the third article of the Confession, which has been read, it is advised
that it would be good to specify what is [deemed canonical] of Esther: that
is, the first ten chapters of Esther instead of the words ‘book of Esther’, and
the first twelve chapters of Daniel excluding the Canticle of the Children
instead of the word ‘Daniel’.”53

52 Braghi, The Evolving Character, Chapter 3.
53 Synode premier provincial de la province de Berry tenu a` Sancerre, in: Benedict
and Fornerod, L’organisation, 48: “Sur le troisiesme article de la Confession leu, est

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

67

As the abridged editions of the Gallican Confession did not include
the Reformed canon of the Bible, it is clear that the participants in
the synod of Berry had the full Gallican Confession under their
eyes. This might have been a handwritten copy: however, we are
aware that the earliest dated edition of the Gallican Confession in
40 articles (i.e. the Confession par les Franc¸ois) appeared in 1561.
But when exactly in 1561 did this edition appear? In other words,
what were the dealings of the leading Reformed pastors and acti-
vists between November 1560 (synod of Guyenne) and April 1561
(synod of Berry)? Why did they discard the abridged editions – as
we will see, along with Chandieu’s preface – and decide to produce
and disseminate copies of the full Gallican Confession?

The national synod of Poitiers was held on 10 March 1561.54
Although the proceedings do not include any official decision to
print the full Gallican Confession, the synod might have entrusted
this task to a group of pastors and activists in a more informal
way. The ministers assembled in Poitiers asked the congregations
of Paris, Orle´ans, and Rouen to write a declaration against the
decrees of the “Papist council” of Trent to proclaim the nullity of
its decisions. This declaration could assume the form either of a
printed book or of a speech in the presence of the king. It could be
prepared “in the manner that [the congregations] will find [most]
suitable”. Article XXX commanded that the Gallican Confession
be offered to the king as soon as the provincial delegates (the de´-
pute´s) of the Reformed churches arrived at court in the following
weeks.55 Other sources suggest that the general synod’s delibera-
tion was executed by provincial synods.56

advise´ qu’il sera bon mectre et speciffier ce qui est receu de Ester, sc¸avoir les dix
premiers chapitres de Ester au lieu de au motz libvres d’Esther, les douze premiers
chappitres de Danyel, horsmis le Canticque des enffans, au lieu de au motz Danyel”.
The Canticle of the Three Children, also known as the Song of the Three Youths and the
Song of the Three Holy Children, is found in Daniel 3, 22–90 in Roman Catholic Bibles
as well as in the Orthodox and in the Septuagint versions of the Scriptures. This passage
is considered non-canonical by the Anglican church and the Reformed churches.

54 Aymon, vol. 1, 13: “Tenu […] le 10. de Mars 1560. avant Paˆques”; Quick, vol. 1,
12: “Articles of the Second Synod held at Poictiers, the tenth Day of March, in the Year
of our Lord One thousand five hundred and sixty, a little before Easter, and in the first
Year of the Reign of Charles the Ninth”. The synod took place in 1561 according to the
modern calendar.

55 Aymon, vol. 1, 22; Quick, vol. 1, 20 (Article XXIX).

68

Gianmarco Braghi

As an early–1561 Instruction pour le faict de la religion repor-
ted, a “general council” of the Gallican church was one of the
official Reformed requests forwarded to the crown by its de´pute´s
at court. Franc¸ois II promised to summon one, even if he died
shortly afterwards.57 The chronological proximity of this request
and the decision by the Poitiers national synod to produce a de-
claration against the decisions of Trent is not accidental. The pro-
ceedings of the Poitiers synod suggest that an edition of the full
Gallican Confession, including especially the Reformed Biblical ca-
non, could have been prepared with a view to the upcoming col-
loquy of Poissy (September 1561) – in which delegates of the
French Reformed churches were invited to participate – as well as
to the e´tats de Pontoise (August 1561).58

Unlikely as it may have been, a settlement between the two sides
of the confessional divide reached within the Gallican church
would cause a total break with Rome and the creation of a ‘pa-
triarchate of Gaul’, following the model that had been inaugurated
by Henry VIII of England a few years before. The memory of the
1551 ‘Gallican crisis’ was still burning in the papal chambers,59

56 As found for example in the proceedings of the provincial synod of Haut-Lan-
guedoc, Quercy, and Rouergue held from 8 to 11 April 1561. Cf. Sinode tenu a Mon-
taulban les huictiesme, neufiesme, dixiesme et unziesme jours d’apvril an mil cinq cens
soixante ung…, in: Benedict and Fornerod, L’organisation, 33f.: “1. En premier, sur
l’article du Sinode general de Poytiers pour envoyer aux Estatz, a este´ ordonne´ que deux
seront deputez […], la charge desquels sera de porter la Confession de foy, procuration
et requeste, signees tant du presidant au nom du Sinode que de tous les acistans [sic] en
icelluy au nom de leurs Eglises, pour le tout presenter ausdicts Estatz devant la majeste´
du Roy avec tous les autres depputez, selon l’article dudict Sinode de Poytiers.”

57 Instruction pour le faict de la religion, in: Benedict and Fornerod, L’organisation,

31, esp. articles XXXIV, XXXV, and XXXVI.

58 On the colloquy of Poissy, Alain Dufour, Le colloque de Poissy, in: Me´langes
d’histoire du XVIe sie`cle offerts a` Henri Meylan, Geneva 1970, 127–137; Donald G.
Nugent, Ecumenism in the Age of the Reformation: The Colloquy of Poissy, Cambridge
(MA) 1974; On Pontoise, Noe¨l Valois, Les e´tats de Pontoise (aouˆ t 1561), in: Revue de
l’histoire de l’E´ glise de France 116 (1943), 237–256.

59 Jouanna et al., Histoire et dictionnaire, 85. On Rome’s stance towards the calling
of the colloquy, Joseph Roserot de Melin, E´ tudes sur les relations du Saint-Sie`ge et
l’E´ glise de France dans la seconde moitie´ du XVIe sie`cle. I: Rome et Poissy, in: Me´langes
d’arche´ologie et d’histoire de l’E´ cole franc¸aise de Rome 39 (1921), 47–151; Nugent,
Ecumenism, passim; Alain Tallon, La France et le concile de Trente (1518–1563), Rome
2000 (Bibliothe`que des E´ coles franc¸aises d’Athe`nes et de Rome 295), Chapter 9; Henry
O. Evennett, The Cardinal of Lorraine and the Council of Trent: A Study in the Coun-

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

69

and Pius IV’s decision to resume the works of the Council of Trent
had a strong political significance in the light of Catherine de Me-
dici’s and chancellor Michel de L’Hospital’s provisional concilia-
tory stance towards heresy.60 From the point of view of the Refor-
med pastorate, no theological reconciliation with the Gallican bi-
shops was possible, and Poissy was merely seen as a public occa-
sion to convince the king and court of the orthodoxy of their doc-
trine.

The publication of the full Gallican Confession in 1561 respon-
ded again to political rather than religious imperatives. Restoring
the list of the canonical books of the Bible in the printed Confes-
sion was another key move through which the Reformed leading
pastors implicitly declared their lack of willingness to compromise
on doctrine. At the same time as they narrowed down the likeli-
hood of a doctrinal arrangement with Rome, these leading pastors
also distanced themselves as clearly as possible from the transver-
sal party of the so-called moyenneurs, a loose coalition of irenicists
who sought reconciliation between the Gallican church and the
Reformed church.61

ter-Reformation, Cambridge 1930. The studies by Lucien Romier, La crise gallicane de
1551, in: Revue Historique 108/2 (1911), 225–250; La crise gallicane de 1551 (Suite et
fin), in: Revue Historique 109/1 (1912), 27–55 are still very useful.

60 On de L’Hospital, see among others Marie Seong-Hak Kim, ‘Dieu nous garde de
la messe du chancellier’: The Religious Belief and Political Opinion of Michel de L’Hoˆ -
pital, in: Sixteenth Century Journal 24/3 (1993), 595–620; Denis Crouzet, La sagesse et
le malheur. Michel de L’Hospital, chancelier de France, Seyssel 1998; Crouzet, Michel
de l’Hospital et l’ide´e de paix, in: Krieg und Frieden im Übergang vom Mittelalter zur
Neuzeit. Theorie – Praxis – Bilder / Guerre et paix du Moyen Aˆ ge aux temps modernes.
– The´orie – Pratiques – Repre´sentations, eds. Heinz Duchhardt and Patrice Veit, Mainz
2000 (Veröffentlichungen des Instituts für Europäische Geschichte Mainz = Beihefte
Universalgeschichte 52), 103–118; Loris Petris, La plume et la tribune. Michel de
L’Hospital et ses discours, 1559–1562, Geneva 2002 (Travaux d’Humanisme et Renais-
sance 360).

61 On the moyenneurs, see Mario Turchetti, Concordia o tolleranza? Franc¸ois Bau-
duin (1520–1573) e i ‘Moyenneurs’, Milan 1984; Mario Turchetti, Religious Concord
and Political Tolerance in Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century France, in: Sixteenth
Century Journal 22/1 (1991), 15–25. On the moderate stance of the cardinal of Lor-
raine at Poissy, see Stuart Carroll, The Compromise of Charles Cardinal de Lorraine:
New Evidence, in: Journal of Ecclesiastical History 54/3 (2003), 469–483. Donald G.
Nugent, The Cardinal of Lorraine and the Colloquy of Poissy, in: Historical Journal
12/4 (1969), 596–605. Nugent’s ideas were criticised by Nicola M. Sutherland, The
Cardinal of Lorraine and the Colloque of Poissy, 1561: A Reassessment, in: Nicola M.
Sutherland, Princes, Politics and Religion 1547–1589, London 1984, 113–137.

70

Gianmarco Braghi

Conclusion

It is hardly surprising that in the 1561 edition of the full Confes-
sion Chandieu’s quarrelsome preface was replaced by a short, well-
mannered supplication addressed to the king. This piece of writing
closely recalled the style of the short preamble of the epistle-like
confession Au Roy, the Gallican Confession’s 1557 archetype.62
Nevertheless, it is key to underline that this preface to the 1561
edition of the full Confession – curiously, also titled Au Roy – was
written early in 1560. This succinct foreword had remained un-
published before this 1561 edition of the Confession was printed.63
This is a further sign of the shape-shifting nature of this twofold
and complex document, composed of a preface that was promptly
adapted to rapidly-fluctuating circumstances and of a list of arti-
cles of faith that was also offered to its shifting intended audiences
in slightly different forms which were fine-tuned to the rhetorical
and theological needs of precise political conjunctures. For exam-
ple, an edition of the Confession in 40 articles but with Chan-
dieu’s preface – a combination unseen before – was published in
1565.64

As we have seen, the tone of both the preface and the Confession
was also carefully cherry-picked depending on its audience. The
preface of the 1561 full Confession – addressed to the person of
the king – was short, concise, and its tenor was ultimately apolo-
getical and supplicatory; on the other hand, Chandieu’s preface –
addressed to “all those who would listen to the poor faithful who
are unfairly defamed and persecuted in the kingdom of France”65 –

62 Confession par les Franc¸ois, fols. A2r–A4r. On Au Roy, see Braghi, Between Paris

and Geneva, passim.

63 Confession par les Franc¸ois, fol. A2r: “[…] maintenant il nous fait cet heur de
veoir qu’avez la volonte´ de connoitre le merite de nostre cause, suyvant l’Edit dernier
donne´ a` Amboise au moys de Mars, l’An present 1559 [but 1560; emphasis mine] qu’il
a pleu a` vostre Maieste´ faire publier. Qui est la cause qu’a` present nous osons ouvrir la
bouche: laquelle nous a este´ parcidevant fermee par l’iniustice & violence de plusieurs
voz officiers, estans plustost incitez de haine contre nous, que de bonne affection a`
vostre service.”

64 Jahr, Studien, 97, item no. 63. This copy is a par les Franc¸ois (as opposed to par

les Eglises) but includes Chandieu’s preface.

65 Confession par les Eglises, 3: “[…] pauvres fideles qui sont iniustement diffamez &
affligez par le royaume de France […] a tous ceux qui leur voudront prester audience.”

Imprime´e de diffe´rentes manie`res

71

was dripping with pugnacious rhetoric and anti-Guise to´ poi. Co-
pies of the Confession with Chandieu’s preface were also reprinted
in subsequent years when need arose.66

The shift in the intended audience of the leading pastors and lay
activists of the French Reformed movement from a very restricted
and ‘internal’ one to the kingdom of France as a whole took place
in a dense and tense phase demanding clear political goals and
coherent steps to pursue them. Key political measures were put
into place in order to achieve support from the crown, the princes
of the royal blood, and in general from broad segments of the
French population possibly sympathetic to the Reformed cause.
Thanks to their clever attempts to influence the political situation
of the kingdom, the clerical and lay leaders of the movement even-
tually managed to obtain a policy of provisional tolerance from the
crown – encapsulated by the so-called e´dit de janvier in 1562 – and
made their voice heard in the highest political assemblies in the
kingdom. The adaptation of the Gallican Confession in different
printed editions was crucial to their endeavours and their pam-
phleteering campaigns of these years, but ended up engendering
confusion in the long term as to whether both versions were ac-
ceptable in terms of doctrine as well as practical use. The national
synod of La Rochelle (1571) put an end to these ambiguities by
officialising the version in 40 articles as promulgated in Paris in
1559.

Gianmarco Braghi, Ph.D. (Collegium Trinitatis iuxta Dublin). “Delio Cantimori–Re-
gione Emilia-Romagna” Fellow, Fondazione per le Scienze Religiose “Giovanni
XXIII”, Bologna.

Abstract: This paper analyses the first printed editions of the Gallican Confession
(agreed upon at the synod of Paris in May 1559) and formulates a hypothesis on the
context in which they were published and disseminated. Analysis is based on abridged
editions of the Confession in Latin and in French, printed in Geneva and Strasbourg,
and featuring a preface authored by pastor Antoine de Chandieu. Although the minis-
ters assembled in Paris in 1559 promulgated a confession in 40 articles, only 35 articles
were included in these editions (which are dated 1559, but were ostensibly printed in

See also Confessio fidei communi ecclesiarum, 3: “Calamitosi fideles, qui praeter me-
ritum in regno Galliae contumeliis iniuriı´sque afficiuntur […] omnibus qui patientes
aures accommodare voluerint.”

66 Cf. Jahr, Studien, 95, item no. 54 (1562); 96, items no. 57–59 (1563); 97, item

no. 62 (1564).

72

Gianmarco Braghi

the first half of 1560). These editions in 35 articles were abridged versions of the ‘full’
Gallican Confession, and this abridgment responded to polemical purposes and political
expediency connected to the failure of the conspiracy of Amboise. This paper also offers
some remarks upon the decision to abandon these 35-articles editions in 1561, probably
with a view to the calling of the e´tats de Pontoise and the colloquy of Poissy.

Keywords: Gallican Confession; French Reformation; Calvinism; Huguenots; Stras-
bourg; Geneva; Antoine de Chandieu; John Calvin; Nicolas des Gallars; Franc¸ois Hot-
man

