Image, «Communal  House», and  Word  in 
relation to some important  changes in the 

visual arts of  Europe 

by  GODFRIED  WILLEM  LOCHER  and  JOHANNES  LODEWIJK  LOCHER 

The  more  a  Student  of  art  history  looks  at  the  development  of  European  visual 
arts, the  more  he  will  be  impressed  by  the  important  changes  that  took  place  in  the 
course  of  time.  We  intend  to  examine  some  of  these  changes  more  closely  -  al-
though  very  briefly  -  from  a point  of  view  that  combines  insights  from  art  history 
and  from  cultural  anthropology.  Our  main  attention  will  be  directed  to  the  art  of 
painting,  though  some  other  aspects  of  the  visual  arts  will  also  be  taken  into  con-
sideration.  In  our  contribution,  two  topics  will  occupy  a  central  position,  viz. 
Image  and  «Communal  House»,  and  Image  and  Word. 

Image  and  «Communal  House» 

To  have  a  separate  place  for  ceremonies  and  social  meetings  is  a  universal  phe-
nomenon  of  human  cultures.  It  may  take  a  variety  of  forms:  open  Spaces  in  the 
woods,  on  the  mountains,  or  near  and  in  the  inhabited  area;  temporary  buildings 
and  movable  tents  like  the  tabernacles  in  ancient  Israel;  natural  sheltered  places 
such  as  mountain  caves;  more  permanent  Community  houses  (of  various  kinds) 
and  sanctuaries  whose  purpose  it  is  to  to  mediate  between  this  world  and  the 
world  of  transcendental  powers  they  represent  (e.g.  the  Borobudur  in  Indonesia). 
A  very  large  part  of  the  visual  arts  of  mankind  was  made  to  function  in  these 
places1.  Of  course,  that  is the  case  with  regard  to  religious,  political  and  social  ar-
chitecture,  but  it  is  also  true  in  respect  of  the  typical  visual  arts,  i.e.,  painting, 
sculpture,  and  related  forms  of  art. 

We  should  be  aware  that  in  other  cultures  and  periods,  distinctions  may  be 
made  in  a  way  which  differs  very  much  from  our  approach  to  the  arts.  Since  it  is 
apparent  that  sculpture  all  over  the  world  has  mostly  been  painted,  we  know  that 
in many  cultures  sculpture  and painting  overlapped.  A  very  good  example  is  given 
by  the  culture  of  ancient  Greece.  As  stated  in  «A  World  History  of  Art»:  «Sculp(cid:173)
ture  was  normally  coloured  and  thus  more  closely  related  to  painting  than  is  now-
adays  apparent;  indeed,  there  seems  to  have  been  a  symbiotic  relationship  be(cid:173)
tween  the  two  arts»2.  Just  as  in  ancient  Mexico,  polychrome  colouring  was  to  be 
found  in  ancient  Greece  on  the  outside  of  momumental  buildings. A  Greek  temple 

1 

2 

Godfried  Willem Locher,  Huis,  Macht  en  Staat,  in:  Bijdragen  tot  de  Taal-,  Land-  en 
Volkenkunde  141, 1985, p. 86 and p. 88. 
Hugh Honour and John Fleming, A world history of art, London  1982, p. 101. 

195 

could not only be characterized  as a form  of  sculpture because of  its outward ori-
entation, it also could be seen as a kind of three-dimensional painting. 

The  study  of  architecture  in  various  cultures  has  demonstrated  how  strongly 
our notion  of  architecture  has  been  influenced  by  the  idea of  shelter.  This  fact  is 
stressed  by  Kubler  in  his  book  on  the  art  and  architecture  of  ancient  Mexico, 
where he writes: «Our conception  of  architecture  has been dominated  for  so long 
by  the  need  for  shelter,  that  we  lack  the  sense  of  building  as  monumental  form 
apart  from  shelter»3. A more comprehensive  idea of  architecture  is necessary  for 
understanding not only the monuments of ancient Mexico but also the monuments 
of  ancient  Greece  and  several  other  countries.  The  Greek  temple  formed  a  unity 
with  the  open  space  connected  to  it.  It  consisted  primarily  of  an  enclosed  room 
opening  at  the  east  end  and  housing  the  statue  of  the  patron  deity.  The  building 
had no congregational  purpose,  since religious  ceremonies  and rituals  took  place 
at an  altar  outside  the front  of  the temple.  Roman  monumental  and  public  archi(cid:173)
tecture gave far more attention to the interior than the Greek had done. The appli-
cation  of  colour  on the  outside  of  buildings  and  on  sculpture  declined  or  ceased. 
However,  whereas  the interior  of  a  Greek  private  house  usually  was  simple  and 
undecorated  and the owner of the house usually did not possess statues, the houses 
of  well-to-do  Romans  were  richly  decorated  and  statues  could  be  found  there, 
even  large  collections4.  The  characterization:  «Greek  architecture  was  a kind  of 
sculpture  made  to  be  seen  from  outside,  Roman  a  development  of  engeneering 
constructed  for  men's  use»  is,  perhaps,  somewhat  exaggerated,  but  it  points  out 
certain tendencies in an excellent way5. 

Temples  and  other  religious  edifices  did  not  occupy  a  dominant  position  in 
Roman  architecture.  Nevertheless,  temples  were  numerous  because  the  Romans 
were  very  active  in  building.  They  also  produced  some  outstanding  creations  in 
this  field  of  architecture,  such  as  the Pantheon  in  Rome. After  the  deification  of 
the  Roman  emperor,  the  many  statues  of  emperor  erected  throughout  the  empire 
brought  a kind  of  religious  atmosphere  to  buildings  and  Spaces that  were not  in-
tended for religious purposes. 

The visual  arts  were  well  represented  in  temples  and  public  buildings  of  the 
Roman world, in the palaces of important officials  and in the houses of prosperous 
people. The expansion  of Christianity took place in this context. How the relation 
between  the church  and the visual  arts  would  develop  was to become  a matter of 
great  importance  to both.  We  shall  examine  this  subject  further  when  discussing 
the relation  between  Image  and  Word.  Here, it is  sufficient  to State that  from  the 
beginning  this relationship was under great  strain, leading more than once to vio-
lent conflicts  in church and Society. 

3  George Kubler, The art and architecture of Ancient America, the Mexican, Maya, and 

Andean peoples, 2nd ed., Harmondsworth 1975, (The Pelican history of art 21), p. 30. 
F. L. Bastet,  Beeld en Relief, Gids voor de verzameling Griekse en Romeinse beeld-
houwkunst in het Rijksmuseum van Oudheden te Leiden, 's-Gravenhage 1979, p. 16. 
The Oxford companion to art, ed. by Harold Osborne, Oxford  1970, p. 992. 

4 

5 

196 

It  is  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  that  over  a  period  of  more  than  a  thousand 
years religious art occupied a supreme position in European  art and culture. As far 
as the visual arts are concerned, we are not thinking only of churches and cloisters 
with  their  mural  painting,  mosaics,  glass  painting,  pictures,  tapestry,  and  sculp-
ture, but also of the religious art in public buildings and in the palaces of State and 
church  leaders. The princes played  an important role in financing  churches, clois(cid:173)
ters and their religious works of art. Much  Support was also given by the nobility, 
the lesser  authorities, and  later  on by  prosperous  cities  with  their  well-to-do Citi(cid:173)
zens  and  influential  guilds.  It is well known  that in various  cases the building of 
cathedrals was made possible by contributions  from  many  sections of the  society. 
Such activity need not be supported for the same reason by all contributors. 

The combination  of  different  interests, of  higher  and  lower  Orders, can  often 
be  observed  when  works  of  art  are  made  in  a  spiritual  environment.  Leonardo's 
Last  Supper  gives  a good  example  of  such  a combination6.  In  1494 Leonardo  da 
Vinci  was commissioned  to execute  a mural painting  of the Last  Supper in  Santa 
Maria  delle  Grazie,  a Dominican  church  and  monastery  in  Milan.  Leonardo  was 
not commissioned  on the initiative of the monastic Community but by the duke of 
Milan,  Lodovico  Sforza,  who  had  chosen  Santa  Maria  delle  Grazie  as  court 
church and burial place for his family. He decreed that the building should receive 
a more splendid  form  in accordance  with its lofty  function.  He employed  the two 
best artists of  his court: the architect  Donato  Bramante, who began the new choir 
in  1492, and Leonardo da Vinci, who in  1494 started his work on the Last Supper 
in the refectory,  which was likewise enlarged. In these years the duke made a hab-
it of  dining  fairly  frequently  at the prior's  table  in  the refectory  which  was to re(cid:173)
ceive Leonardo's masterpiece. The renovated  Santa Maria delle Grazie did not re-
sult  in  the  perpetuation  of  Sforza's  name  and  fame.  The  new  architecture  of  the 
church itself proved to be quite an important phase in the development of the great 
architect  Bramante.  However,  the  church  and  monastery  complex  won  fame  all 
over  the  world  because  it houses  Leonardo's  Last  Supper.  This  tableau  is  part of 
an  organic  whole  including  the  surrounding  building,  as  the  artist  intended.  The 
great difference  is that this building now functions  as a museum! 

In the sixteenth Century, the position  of religious art underwent radical  change 
in a number of  important  European  countries. This change  was brought  about by 
the great crisis  in relations  between  the church  and  the visual  arts  in the  wake of 
the  Reformation  with  its  program  of  return  to  what  it  regarded  as  the  original 
content  of  Christianity.  To  the  reformers,  this  content  not  only  had  been  over-
grown  by  peripheral  inessentials  that  acquired  a  position  of  central  importance, 
but had also been  affected  by ideas which the Reformation  regarded as absolutely 
inconsistent with Christian principles. 

6  Godfried  Willem  Locher,  Changing  interpretation  in the study of art and culture, in: 

The language of things, Mededelingen van het Rijksmuseum  voor Volkenkunde, Lei(cid:173)
den, No. 25, 1990, pp. 30-32 [abbr.: Locher, Interpretation] and the literature mention-
ed there. 

197 

The visual arts disappeared  from  many churches  in the reformed  areas of Eu-
rope. This  did  not  stop the production  of  art  inspired  by  the  Bible. However,  the 
image no longer functioned  as a ritual element in the church7. In contrast to what 
happened  in the churches  of the Reformation,  the use of  visual  arts in the Roman 
Catholic  Church  was  greatly  stimulated  by  the  Counter-Reformation,  especially 
by new religious Orders such as the Jesuits. In combination  with a kind of mystic 
piety, the art of the Counter-Reformation  propagated  the image of the militant and 
triumphant  Church.  The  idea  of  a  continuous  process  of  secularization  since  the 
Renaissance and Reformation  does not apply to a large part of Europe. 

It  is true, however,  that  religious  art  had  definitely  lost  its dominant  position 
in  most  countries  of  Europe.  Themes  for  images  were  no  longer  taken  mainly 
from  sacred  history  and  church  tradition.  Antiquity  and  national  history  also be-
came  important  sources  for  the  visual  arts.  Moreover,  elements  that  were 
peripheral  in pictures  of earlier periods  not only received  more attention but  even 
became central themes. In this connection we refer to the genres of landscape, still 
life,  and  portrait,  which  acquired  a  special  place  in  Dutch  art  and  were  to  be 
highly appreciated  in later centuries in the international art world. 

As Dutch and other European cities gained importance as economic and social 
centres,  local  officials,  rieh  merchants  and  governors  of  all  kinds  of  institutions 
had  portraits  painted  much  more  frequently.  As  prosperous  Citizens  acquired  so(cid:173)
cial prominence, they also started to commission portraits of themselves  and their 
families.  Both group portraits  and individual  portraits  were very populär.  Several 
of the most  important  artists in this period  (the  17th Century) held positions  at the 
dynastic  courts  of  much  greater  influence  on  the  Standing  of  art  and  artists  than 
has  been  assumed  for  a  long  time8.  These  court  artists  not  only  functioned  as 
painters  of portraits  and other genres but  also  advised  and assisted  with regard  to 
the expansion  of  the royal  art collection.  Velasquez  is  a good  example  of  such a 
court funetionary.  He was ennobled by Philip IV, king of Spain, and thus acquired 
a Status reached by many artists in the period between  1300 and  1800. 

A court  artist was  subjeet  to certain  limitations, but on the other hand he was 
free  of  guild restrictions,  was not dependent  on market  forces,  and enjoyed  many 
Privileges in connection  with his court  funetion. 

The  large  art collections  of princes  and  of  other  wealthy  people preceded  the 
public collections in the «Community houses» known as museums. It is  significant 
that  the  buildings  in  which  museums  were housed  in many  cases  had  previously 
functioned  as palaces  (e.g. the Louvre)  or, when newly  built, had the  appearance 
of  a palace. The museum  building  could  also  look like  a temple  with  colonnades 
or,  by  its  style,  remind  one  of  a  church.  In  recent  times,  when  many  museums 
have aimed  at maximum  attendance, the museum has often  taken on the character 
of  a business  enterprise. This development  is also expressed  in the  style of many 

7 

On the ritual  funetion  of  art  in the  church,  see: Hans  Belting,  Bild  und  Kult,  eine Ge(cid:173)
schichte des Bildes vor dem Zeitalter der Kunst, München  1990 [abbr.: Belting, Bild]. 
8  Martin Warnte,  Hofkünstler,  zur Vorgeschichte des modernen Künstlers, Köln 1985. 

198 

new museum buildings and by the way in which the collection  is shown, in many 
respects  similar to the displays  in a modern  department  störe (e.g. Centre  Pompi-
dou). A reaction  against  this  trend  has  started  but  a  satisfactory  compromise  has 
yet to be found  between  the various functions  of the museum,  such as the presen-
tation of more permanent exhibits and of changing exhibitions. 

The creation  of art for  sale to private and public collections via artdealers is a 
modern  development  which  does  not  seem  to  correspond  to  the  spiritual  ideals 
about  what  art  should  be. The  same problem  arises  when  we  look  at  attempts  in 
this Century to integrate art and society, as happened  under communist  and  fascist 
regimes and in revolutionary movements seeking a new social order. 

Image and Word 

From the study of non-literate cultures we have learned about the close connection 
which exists between  word and image, even though  the visual  arts have their own 
structure  and  tradition.  Mythology  is of  great  value  for  understanding  the  icono-
graphy  of  these  cultures,  and  vice-versa.  In  many  countries,  it  is  impossible  to 
determine  the  meaning  of  certain  images  without  knowledge  of  the  customary 
sayings  and proverbs9. Cosmological  ideas are often  associated  with the architec-
ture  of  these  cultures  and  the  same  holds  true  for  the  colours  used  inside  and 
outside  the  «communal  houses»  of  societies  characterized  by  a  more  sedentary 
way  of  life.  As  we  know  from  the  history  of  art,  the  above-mentioned  relations 
between  word and image are also present in literate cultures, sometimes even to a 
greater extent. 

Appreciation  of the various arts and art-forms  differs  according to culture, so(cid:173)

cial group and time. Anthropological  fieldwork  has proved that the gift  of oratory, 
the command of rhythmic language and narrative art are highly regarded by many 
nonliterate peoples, as are singing, music  and, last but not least, dancing.  Among 
some literate peoples, «writing»  as a form  of art is very highly esteemed. The Po(cid:173)
sition of calligraphy  in Chinese and Japanese culture  and in the Islamic  world  are 
excellent  examples  of  this  appreciation,  and  in  this  connection  mention  should 
also be made of ancient Israel, classical Antiquity  and the European Middle Ages. 
In the Gothic period, architecture  was highly valued  as an art form,  while in later 
ages painting and sculpture came to the fore in Europe. 

Within  a  given  artistic  genre,  it  was  of  much  importance  which  form  was 
practised  and  what  subjects  were chosen.  However,  many  changes  took  place  in 
the appreciation  of  art forms  and  subjects  over the course of  time. This  apprecia(cid:173)
tion  was  influenced  by  one's national  or local  culture  and  social  class. Some cul(cid:173)
tures have a negative attitude to certain arts, art forms  and subjects, an attitude not 
limited  to certain  groups  but  characteristic  of  the  cultural  mainstream.  In  ancient 

9 

A. A. Gerbrands, Art as an element of culture, especially in Negro-Africa,  in: Medede-
lingen van het Rijksmuseum  voor Volkenkunde, Leiden, No. 12, 1957, p. 114. 

199 

Israel  and  in  Muslim  culture  this  negative  attitude  was very  evident  in respect  of 
the  visual  representation  of  divinity.  In  both  cultures,  there  was  also  a  kind  of 
aversion  to figurative  art in general, especially  in the religious  sphere. As often  is 
the case, these  are not  absolute  rules. We must  allow  for  divergences  and excep-
tions  since  there  are  different  currents  in  Islam  and  in  Jewish  tradition  and  also 
differences  in respect of time and in regional cultural backgrounds. 

In  the  first  centuries  many  leaders  of  the  Christian  church  feit  very  uneasy 
about the relation  between  images  and the church. This is understandable  consid-
ering  the  Jewish-Christian  background  of  the  church,  the  negative  reaction  of 
Christians to the cult images of Greek and Roman deities and their refusal  to ven(cid:173)
erate the image  of the deified  emperor.  Several Christian  writers  of that time dis-
cussed  the  use  of  images  and  image  worship.  They  declared  themselves  against 
the use of images or insisted on the greatest prudence if they were used. It may be 
true that no image  worship really occurred -  anyhow not on a large  scale -  in the 
first centuries of Christianity  and that listening to the Scriptures and their explana-
tion  was  an essential  element  of  the  religious  Service, while  the presence  of reli(cid:173)
gious images  on the walls was of  secondary  importance only10. The fact  that var-
ious  leaders  of  the  church  continued  to  discuss  the  problem  of  images  demon-
strates  how  much  they  were  afraid  of  idolatry  and  of  losing  the  spiritual  idea of 
God. 

After  the conversion  of emperor Constantine, the mass of the population join-
ed  the  church.  At  the  end  of  the  fourth  Century,  Christianity  became  the  official 
religion  of  the  Empire.  This  development  made  the  problem  of  images  in  the 
church  even  more  pressing,  accustomed  as  the  people  were  to  a  close  relation 
between  worship and image. In the eastern part of the Roman empire, and later in 
the Byzantine  empire, not only image  worship, but later even an image  cult came 
into  being. This  latter  development  led  to violent  conflicts  in church  and  society 
during the eighth  and  ninth  centuries.  Many  images  and  illuminated  manuscripts 
were destroyed  in that period. Finally, the iconoclasts  lost the fight,  one in which 
not only religious motives were involved. 

In arguments in favour  of the legitimacy  of images in the church, the doctrine 
of  Incarnation  played  a  significant  role.  The  Old  Testament  command  against 
image  worship was superseded  by God's epiphany  in the form  of the Son of Man. 
Christ  as Man  is an image  of God. Therefore,  his image  also implies  an image of 
God. If  it were forbidden  to make an image  of Christ, it would  mean that He did 
not live among us as a real human being. This would be in conflict  with the ortho(cid:173)
dox  dogma  about  the  two  natures  of  Christ.  Therefore,  the  argumentation  of  the 
iconoclasts  should  be  rejected  as  heretical.  An  extreme  position  was  that  God's 
image  should  be  regarded  as  «incarnation».  In  his  important  book  «Bild  und 
Kult», Hans Belting  summarizes: «das Bild Gottes sei, wie die Menschenfrau  Ma(cid:173)
ria  bei  der  Zeugung  Christi,  vom  Heiligen  Geist  überschattet  worden»11.  Ac-

10  F. van der Meer, Oudchristelijke kunst, 2nd ed., Bussum 1972, p. 110. 
11  Belting, Bild 174. 

200 

cording to this view  the Holy  Spirit  actually  functioned  as an artist. This idea co-
incides  with  the  contemporaneous  belief  that  miraculous  images  were  not  man-
made but  a gift  from  Heaven.  The  legendary  vernicle,  a cloth  impressed  with  an 
image of  Christ's face  and later associated  with  St. Veronica, belongs  to the same 
category. 

In  787  the  second  General  Council  of  Nicaea  sanctioned  the  veneration  of 
images  and  anathematized  the  accusation  of  idolatry  from  the  side  of  the  icono-
clasts. However,  it decided  that this worship did not  apply to the image  itself  but 
to what was pictured  and that a distinction  should be made between  the adoration 
of  God  and  the  veneration  of  the  image.  The  image  in  question  was  mainly  the 
two-dimensional  icon,  which  held  an  essential  place  in  the  Eastern  Orthodox 
Church. On the other hand, the three-dimensional  sculptural  image faded  into the 
background or disappeared from  the church in this part of Europe. 

The  decisions  of  787  (Nicaea  II)  were  rejected  by  the  Frankish  theologians 
and Synods in Western  Europe. They did not agree with the veneration of  images 
and rejected  the  ideas  and behaviour  of  the  iconoclasts  as well. Images  remained 
in the church  but only for narrative purposes  and decoration. They had a didactic, 
not a cultic function.  In its totality, the whole church  building  could give expres-
sion  to  Word  and  Sacrament,  to  Gospel  and  Mystery  as, for  example,  is  evident 
from  some  types  of  Gothic  churches  where  architecture,  stained-glass  Windows 
and sculpture were subordinated to that common purpose. 

An important element  in many  medieval  churches  was the presence  of relics: 
the mortal remains of a saint or any object  that had been  in contact  with the  saint. 
Over time, veneration  of relics grew in Christianity. They received a central  place 
in the church, usually in or near the altar. 

In  the  later  Middle  Ages  the  veneration  of  images,  which  previously  had  an 
incidental  character  in  the  West,  became  a  general  phenomenon.  In  the  Western 
church  it  involved  two-dimensional  paintings,  especially  altarpieces,  as  well  as 
three-dimensional  representations.  Just  as  in  Eastern  church,  images  of  Christ, 
Mary  and  the  Saints  were  venerated,  and  not  only  in  a  mystical  way.  From  the 
fourteenth  Century  on,  the  number  of  stories  about  speaking,  miraculous  and 
bleeding  images  increased  constantly.  People  were  increasingly  inclined  to  be-
lieve in the inherent miraculous power of the image itself, as they did with regard 
to  the  relics  of  the  Saints12.  In  the  same  period,  there  was  a  strong  tendency  to 
transform  peripheral  and  subordinate elements  into central  and autonomous units. 
In  the  church  this  process  meant  that  several  elements  became  detached  from  a 
real Christian context. In religious manuscripts of the period, more and more illus-
trations were introduced that had little or nothing to do with the text of the manu-
script. These processes  in the church,  of  idolatry  on the one hand  and  seculariza-

Christian  Tümpel,  Religious history painting, in: God, saints, and heroes, Dutch his-
tory-painting in the age of Rembrandt, National Gallery of Art (Washington)  1980/1, p. 
45 [abbr.: Tümpel, Painting], 

201 

tion  on  the  other,  were  sharply  criticized  from  various  sides.  Abuses  were  de-
nounced in words that could not be misunderstood;  without much result, however. 
An important change was brought about by the Reformation,  which began as a 
movement  of  return  to  the  original  core  of  the  Christian  faith.  According  to  the 
view  of the reformers,  a central place  should  be given  again to the Word  of God. 
The  Word  took  form  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Word  incarnate,  and  could  be  known 
from  the Holy  Scriptures. In turn, the  Scriptures  did not come into being  without 
the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  reformers  did  not  hold  the  same  opinion 
about the relationship between Word and Spirit. One problem was the relationship 
between  human  spirit  and  Holy  Spirit  in  connection  with  the  preaching  of  the 
Word  of  God13. A common  aim  was to further  as much  as possible the  spread of 
the  Bible  in  vernacular  language  and  to  promote  the  study  of  the  original  lan-
guages of the Bible for a better understanding of Scripture. 

The Reformation  brought the primacy  of the word to the fore. Any idea about 
incarnation  in  an  image  or  a  parallel  placing  of  word  and  image  was  absolutely 
out  of  the  question.  However,  the  problem  of  images  in  the  church  did  not  have 
priority  so far  as Luther and Zwingli  were concerned. It was the violent action of 
the radical  iconoclasts  that made the problem  an urgent  matter  in the twenties  of 
the sixteenth  Century. Both  Luther  and Zwingli  rejected  the forcible  behaviour  of 
the  radicals  but  agreed  with  the  ultimate  aim  of  the  action,  i.e.  to  put  an  end  to 
image worship. In  1524 Zwingli took care that images  and relics were not remov-
ed from  the churches  in a revolutionary  way. Zwingli's  comprehensive  Statement 
about  the image problem  dates  from  1525 and was  still  of  influence  in the  Neth(cid:173)
erlands  of  the  seventeenth  Century14.  Zwingli  regarded  art  as  a  gift  of  God.  It 
would be senseless  to remove images from  the churches  in which the subject  was 
only represented  as history  («geschichtswyss»), But certainly, all measures  should 
be taken  to  prevent  the veneration  of  images  and  consideration  should  be  shown 
for the weak characters who easily were led into idolatry. Zwingli pointed out that 
the place where the image was shown could be of great importance in this respect. 
That  is the main  reason  why Zwingli  was, in general,  against  the presence  of im(cid:173)
ages in the church  and why he made an exception for  stained glass Windows. Ac(cid:173)
cording  to him,  images  in  that place  did  not  lead  to  idolatry.  Outside  the  church 
building,  Biblical  pictures  of  a  didactic  character  might  be  used  for  private  and 
public purposes. 

With  regard  to  the  issue  of  images,  Calvin  went  further  than  Zwingli.  No 
image  whatsoever  of  God  should  be  made.  In  addition,  Calvin  sharply  curtailed 

13  Gottfried Wilhelm Locher, Prophetie in der Reformation,  in: Charisma und Institution, 
hrsg. von Trutz Rendtorff,  Gütersloh  1985, p. 102. Gottfried Wilhelm Locher,  Grund(cid:173)
züge der Theologie Huldrych Zwingiis im Vergleich mit derjenigen Martin Luthers und 
Johannes  Calvins,  ein  Überblick,  in:  Zwingliana  12/7,  1967/1,  470-509,  und  12/8, 
1967/2, 545-595, (Wiederabdruck in: G. W. Locher, Huldrych Zwingli in neuer Sicht, 
1969, pp. 173-274). H. Berkhof, Christelijk Geloof, 2nd ed., Nijkerk  1973, pp. 61-64. 

14  Tümpel, Painting 46. 

202 

the  permissible  subject  matter.  Luther's  attitude,  on  the  other  hand,  was  much 
more positive  than  Zwingli's,  especially  in  his  later  years.  For  Luther  it was  im-
portant  that  the image  should  not be venerated.  When  used  in church,  even  as an 
altarpiece,  it  should  support  the  preaching  of  the  Word  of  God  and,  therefore, 
have a didactic function  only. Luther also became much interested in the selection 
of  appropriate pictures  for  illustrated  Bible  editions, which  were in great  demand 
at that time15. 

All three Reformers  seem to have had a certain  preference  for  images that re-
presented events and histories believed to be true. This is probably connected  to a 
great  shift  in Europe -  apart  from  eastern  and  southeastern  Europe -  from  devo-
tional  church  art to  esthetically  appreciated,  narrative  art: the history  painting, of 
which  the  religious  history  painting  was  a  subdivision.  A  history  painting  is  a 
painting with large figures  (no portraits), which represents an episode of a story. It 
could be a scene from  the Bible, from  classical myfhology,  or refer  to a legendary 
event or an episode from  history. Without knowing the story, it was impossible to 
understand the painting. It is this kind of painting which in the first  centuries  after 
the Renaissance  and Reformation  received the highest  appreciation,  also in  finan-
cial respects. 

In  his  general  introduction  to the  exhibition  «God,  Saints  and  Heroes: Dutch 
history painting in the age of Rembrandt»  (National Gallery  of Art -  Washington, 
1980/1)  the  Dutch  art  historian  Albert  Blanken  states:  «The  greatest  number  of 
seventeenth-century  Dutch  history  paintings  are  representations  of  episodes  from 
the Bible. Less numerous, but also very much  in demand  were mythological  sub-
jects.  These  are  followed  in  popularity  by  stories  from  Greek  and  Roman  his(cid:173)
tory»16. The fact  that Dutch history  painting  was  of  so much  importance  during a 
long period after  the Reformation  -  in the second half of the seventeenth Century a 
decline took place -  was a surprising discovery, made primarily by Dutch students 
of art in the second half of this Century. It became evident, that Rembrandt and his 
school  were no exception  in the Netherlands  in giving much  attention  to  Biblical 
subjects.  The  exhibition  in  the  United  States  and  later  at  Amsterdam  (1981  -
«God en  de goden»)  was  meant  to give greater  publicity  to changing  ideas  about 
the Dutch art of the seventeenth Century. 

The Reformation  greatly  influenced  the  way  in  which  Biblical  subjects  were 
chosen  for  religious  paintings.  In  his  important  contribution  «Religious  History 
Painting»  to  the  publication  «God,  Saints  and  Heroes»,  the  Rembrandtexpert 
Christian  Tümpel  points  out:  «Contemporary  accounts  reveal  that  in  the  seven(cid:173)
teenth Century  such pictures  were interpreted  either literally, morally  or devotion-
ally, and that they  often  evoked association with the life of the person  depicted or 

15  Hans Freiherr von  Campenhausen,  Zwingli und Luther zur Bilderfrage,  in: Das Got(cid:173)

tesbild  im Abendland,  hrsg. von Günter Howe, Glaube  und Forschung  15,  1957, p. 
157. 

16  Albert Blanken,  General Introduction, in: God, Saints and Heroes (see Note 12) p. 20 

[abbr.: Blankert, Introduction]. 

203 

were  related  to  political  events.  The  reason  is  not  hard  to  uncover  -  it  too  was  a 
product  of  Reformation  thinking»17. 

Tümpel  also notes  a preference  for  the  narrative,  epic, novelistic  aspects  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament,  e.g.,  scenes  of  God's  influence  on  the  patriarchs,  on  bib-
lical  heroes,  kings,  and  prophets,  and  on  the  life  of  his  Son  or  of  Christ's  apostles. 
Tümpel  remarks  that  «The  century's  almost  encyclopedic  hunger  for  knowledge 
led  artists  to  rediscover  the  Bible.  Artists  uncovered  in  sixteenth-century  graphics 
a  treasure  trove  of  previously  unrecognized  or  unknown  biblical  subjects  which 
were  now  done  as paintings  for  the first  time»18. 

In  the  Netherlands,  customers  of  this  art  were  the  palaces  and  collections  of 
the  «stadholder»,  as  well  as  public  institutions  and  buildings.  Churches  unless 
Lutheran  or  Roman  Catholic  (if  permitted  or  tolerated)  were  not  among  them. 
However,  the  greatest  customer  was  the  Dutch  burgher,  although  his  preference 
was  directed  to  other  genres  of  painting.  Apart  from  individual  and  family  por-
traits, his  preference  was  for  scenes  from  daily  life,  landscape,  and  still  life.  For  a 
long  time  these  genres  were  regarded  as  typical  of  Dutch  realism  and  as  signifi-
cant  for  the  way  in  which  the  numerous  owners  of  these  paintings  enjoyed  the  ar-
tistic representation  of  their  immediate  environment. 

Since the  last decades,  a great  change  has  also taken  place in  the  Interpretation 
of  that  art.  The  realism  of  Dutch  seventeenth-century  art  has  been  called  an  in-
vention  of  the  nineteenth  Century.  It  was  only  an  apparent  realism;  actually  it 
should  be  regarded  and  interpreted  as  emblematic  art.  Sometimes,  there  was  a 
tendency  to  deny  all  elements  of  realism  in  giving  an  almost  exclusive  symbolic 
interpretationls.  However,  we  are  often  confronted  with  paintings  in  which  sharp 
observations  of  visual  reality  are  combined  with  representations  of  a  symbolic 
nature  that  indicate  the  moralistic  meaning  of  the  pictures.  In  general,  contem-
poraries  recognized  those  symbolic  indications  very  well  and  knew  that  they  often 
referred  to common  sayings  and  proverbs.  Sometimes,  however,  the  clues  were  of 
a  more  sophisticated  character  and  could  only  be  understood  by  spectators  with  a 
certain  literary  training.  To  understand  many  paintings  of  those  genres,  familiarity 
with  the relevant  spoken  and  written  language  was  a  necessity. 

In  regard  to  painting,  the  Netherlands  were  not  isolated,  but  occupied  an  im-
portant  place  with  a  strong  individual  character.  Protestantism  played  an  influen-
tial  role,  although  it  was  not  dominant.  There  were  many  contacts  between  Protes(cid:173)
tant  and  Roman  Catholic  artists  in  the  Netherlands  as  well  as  in  the  international 
European  world.  «As  early  as  the  sixteenth  Century,  it  was  not  unusual  to  find 
Protestant  illustrations  in  Catholic  Bibles»,  writes  Tümpel.  In  the  preceding  para-
graph  he  states:  «The  age's  fascination  with  religious  history  was  not  diminished 
by  the  pictorial  strictures  of  the  Calvinistic  church,  Jewish  immigrants,  or  the 
Mennonites.  Art  even  slowly  found  its  way  back  into  the  Calvinistic  church.  At 

17  Tümpel, Painting 50. Christian Tümpel, Rembrandt, Amsterdam  1986. 
18  Tümpel, Painting 50. 
19  Locher, Interpretation 32-33 and the literature mentioned there. 

204 

first,  it reappeared  in the guise of  stained  glass Windows  in churches -  in  accord-
ance with Zwingli's teaching, but later  it spread to such  areas as organ  decoration 
and even  the  adornment  of  a few  pulpits. Even  the Jews commissioned  works of 
Old Testament history. During the first  half  of the eighteenth Century, in the wake 
of  a  liberal  policy  shift,  Catholics  were  also  officially  able  to  decorate  their 
churches  with  art.  And  so  even  in  the  realm  of  art,  the  spirit  of  tolerance  tri-
umphed.  This  was  a  spirit  which  bound  all  artists  together  throughout  the  six-
teenth  and  seventeenth  centuries. When they  beheld  a picture  of religious  history 
which so fascinated  fhem  that they too wanted to depict  it, painters never  inquired 
first  into the other artists' religious  affiliation»20. 

In  several  respects, the  liberal  bourgeoisie  of  nineteenth-century  Europe held 
false  notions  about  the  «bourgeoisie»  of  seventeenth-century  Holland.  Albert 
Blankert points out: «Dutch burghers had not the least desire to emancipate them-
selves  from  the  authority  of  the  Bible  and  classical  literature»21.  The primacy  of 
the word continues  tili the end  of  the eighteenth  Century and still has  some  influ-
ence  on  the  Romantic  movement.  Then,  however,  begins  a  period  of  liberation 
from  the past and a time of experiments which represent Visual reality  in a kind of 
dialectical  interaction  with  an  intensive  quest  for  lasting  truth  and  reality  behind 
the phenomena. 

The  concept  of  inspiration  and  blessing  of  man's  production  of  important 
works, has been associated for a long time with the idea of a gift  from  Above. The 
Reformation  opposed the view that man as such was able to make works of lasting 
value,  let  alone  that  such  works  might  have  merits  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  The 
Humanism of that period  was inclined to see man as creator as well as creature. In 
the later  centuries, the  gift  from  Above  was  more  and  more replaced  by  the idea 
that  some people  received  their  great  talent  by  Nature. In  common  language,  the 
terms creativity  and  inspiration  were used  almost  without  any  connection  to God 
and the Holy Spirit22. 

In  this period, views  of  the universe  changed  greatly.  The  idea of  a «higher» 
reality  lost  its  function  as  point  of  orientation.  To  many,  it  was  replaced  by  the 
notion  of  a plural  reality.  That  reality  can  be  seen  as  fundamental  for  our  exist-
ence,  but  also  as  the  reality  of  which  our  horizontal  concrete  reality  is  a  direct 
manifestation.  These  ideas  had  much  influence  on paintings  and  graphic  art  after 
1800. Three examples will be discussed briefly  to illustrate this complex issue. 

Nineteenth-century  realism  in Visual arts  was especially  focussed  on the con(cid:173)

crete phenomenal  world  and  the life  of  the  common  man.  Gustave  Courbet,  who 
set himself  up  as the  leader  of  the realist  school  of  paintings, was  a great  Propa(cid:173)
gandist  of this movement.  His immense  horizontal  painting  «A burial  at  Omans» 
(1849)  was meant  as an anti-traditional  breakthrough. It gives a picture of  a com-

20  Tümpel, Painting 52. 
21  Blankert, Introduction 24. 
22  S. Dresden, Het humanistisch denken, Italie-Frankrijk  1450-1600, Amsterdam  1967, p. 

234. S. Dresden, Wat is creativiteit? Een essay, Amsterdam 1987, passim. 

205 

mon  burial  in  Courbet's  region  of  origin  without  any  idealization.  The  religious 
element  is  only  represented  in  the presence  of  the priest  and  his  suite,  and  a  few 
outward  Symbols. There  is no  Suggestion  at all of  the  spiritual  values  which  they 
represent. The painting reflects  the earthly horizontal reality, what was visible at a 
certain  moment  in time. Courbet  spent much time and energy  to give the impres-
sion of an artless casual event which had a meaning in itself. When it was exhibit-
ed at the  Salon  of  1851, it provoked  much  criticism.  Some critics  rejected  it as a 
blasphemous  caricature of  a religious ceremony, which certainly  was not the pur-
pose of the painter. Many ridiculed it because a trivial and insignificant  event was 
depicted in a way that was out of all proportion,  and with  a repellent ugliness. At 
present, it is one of the most important paintings in the «Musee d'Orsay»  at Paris. 
This  painting  has  been  contrasted  with  El  Greco's  famous  vertical-monumental 
painting  «The Burial  of  Count  Orgaz»  which  dates  from  the period  of  the  Coun-
ter-Reformation  (1586) and is located in the Santo Tome at Toledo (Spain). In this 
painting  the reality  of earth and the reality  of  heaven  are differentiated  as well as 
connected in a dynamic way23. 

The  second  example  is  Mondriaan  (1872-1944)  who  became  a  leader  of  the 
geometric abstract style in painting24. He began as a painter, mainly of landscapes, 
in the manner of the Hague School. During a short period his work was  influenced 
by theosophy  but thereafter  he developed a visual language of his own. Very soon 
there was no longer  any reference  to a recognizable  «reality». At first,  this  visual 
language  consisted  of  small  two-dimensional  «planes»,  taken  from  Cubism.  But 
gradually  a process  of hardening  took place and colour took on more importance. 
About  1920, Mondriaan  only used large «planes» with bright colours, mostly red, 
yellow  and  blue, supplemented  by  white, black  and grey.  They  were  demarcated 
by  straight  lines,  only  applied  in  the  two  most  elementary  directions:  horizontal 
and vertical. The contrast  between  these  two directions  was regarded  as  essential 
by  Mondriaan  because  it  symbolized  the  fundamental  contrasts  of  human  exist-
ence.  To  harmonize  these  contrasts  that  was  the  aim  of  Mondriaan's  work  as an 
artist.  He was convinced  that his paintings  gave expression  to universal  harmony 
and  genuine  pure  reality  by  revealing  the  fundamental  structure.  This  structure 
was the lasting foundation  of  a changing phenomenal  world. As  soon  as this  fun(cid:173)
damental  structure became concrete reality, the function  of  art would be  finished, 
because  we  would  live  in  the middle  of  it. Mondriaan  to  some extent  anticipated 
this future  event by the way he organized his studio in later years. 

Our  last  example  is  the  print  «Verbum»  made  by  the  graphic  artist  M.  C. 
Escher in  194225. This litho is part of a series which includes the long print Meta-
morphosis,  showing alternately  the transition  from  abstract to figurative  and  from 

23  Linda Nochlin, Realism, Harmondsworth  1971, (Style and civilization). 
24 

/. L. Locher, ... [et al.],  150 jaar moderne kunst in het Haags Gemeentemuseum, series: 
Openbaar Kunstbezit, Den Haag 1974, pp. 71-75. 

25  The world of M. C. Escher, ed.: /. L. Locher, with contributions by J. L. Locher, C. H. 

A. Broos, M. C. Escher, G. W. Locher, H. S. M. Coxeter, New York 1971, p. 116. 

206 

figurative  to abstract. The print Verbum  demonstrates  the transition from  abstract 
to figurative. 

From  the  grey  transparent  centre,  in  which  the  word  Verbum  is  located, 
primordial triangulär figures emerge which -  arriving at the borders of the regulär 
hexagon  -  have  developed  into  birds,  fish  and  frogs.  They  represent  the  living 
beings  in the air,  in the water  and on land. This picture  story reminded  Escher of 
the  Creation  story  in  the  Bible  and  that  induced  him  to  put  the  word  Verbum 
horizontally  in the centre  of  the print.  As he told  one of  us, he later  on  preferred 
the word «Logos»  instead of  «Verbum». When he made the litho in  1942, he was 
going  through  a difficult  period,  not  only  because  of  the Nazi  dictatorship  which 
he detested, but also on account of personal circumstances. In this period, he came 
for  a  short  time  under  the  religious  influence  of  a  faithful  Protestant  friend  and 
that  was, perhaps,  the  main  reason  why  he  placed  the  word  Verbum  in  the  grey 
centre  of  the print.  Grey  is  often  used  by  Escher  as  the primordial  colour  which 
contains potential  manifestations.  In this case, the grey  is presented  in a transpar(cid:173)
ent form,  as if  a movement  from  outside  had passed  through  it, leaving behind  it 
the creative Verbum. 

Although  we  are faced  with  an  incidental  combination  of  word  and  image, it 
gives a surprising  insight into ways of thinking about the plural reality  of modern 
times  and  their  representation  -  especially  when  supplemented  by  the  given  ex-
amples regarding the work of Mondriaan and Courbet. 

The difference  from previous periods is evident, but there is also a remarkable 
continuity  of  issues  -  for  example,  the  search  for  what  is  lasting  in  and  behind 
phenomena and the constantly recurring quest for the lost and future paradise. 

Prof. Dr. Godfried  Willem Locher, Schelpenkade 50, NL-2313 ZX Leiden, and Johannes 
Lodewijk Locher, Soendastraat 14, NL-2585 VD Den Haag 

207 

