Subita Conversio 

The Conversion of John Calvin 

by  HEIKO A.  OBERMAN 

/. The Anatomy ofthe  Soul 

Martin  Luther  characterized  Erasmus  of  Rotterdam  as  an  eel;  in  the  modern 
language  of  road  signs  this means  a man  <with  soft  shoulders>,  who  is <slippery 
when  wet>. The reformer  of  Wittenberg  is most  certainly  not  an objective judge; 
later  scholarship,  however,  documents  the  degree  of  difficulty  in  penetrating  the 
inner domain of Erasmus the man. 

Yet, as compared with the Genevan reformer  John Calvin, forty  years his jun(cid:173)

ior,  Erasmus  seems  truly  an  open  book.  Even  if  we  had  at  our  disposal  some 
record  of  Calvin's  table  talk,  which  proves  to  be  such  a rieh  source  for  grasping 
Luther's  personality,  it  would  by  no  means  be  certain  that  we  would  be  able  to 
catch  even  so much  as  a glimpse  of  Calvin's  inner  life.  Throughout  he  remained 
true  to  the  principle  of  reticence  expressed  in  his  answer  to  Cardinal  Sadolet 
(1539): «De me non libenter loquor»1. This does not mean  that his  screen of reti(cid:173)
cence  is  impenetrable.  But  in  his  extensive  psychological  analyses  of  Moses, 
Abraham,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Job,  and  the  Apostle  Paul,  to  mention  only  his  most 
nuanced  and  elaborate  psychographs  of  key  biblical  figures,  Calvin  concentrates 
on  common  characteristics  of  the human  condition  rather  than  on  uniquely  indi-
vidual traits. Moreover, Calvin is able to identify  with so broad a spectrum  of bib(cid:173)
lical characters  and personalities  that the crude principle of projeetion  necessarily 
leads to uncontrolled conclusions. 

The  most  promising  method  in  each  of  these  cases  is  to  highlight  so-called 
exegetical  comments  for  which  there  is  no  explicit  basis  in  the  biblical  text 
concerned. Yet more often  than not, as soon as the observant reader has  identified 
such a revealing  interpolation,  Calvin opens the following  clause with the expres-
sion <as we all know> (seimus), thus alerting the reader to the fact that he believes 
he  is  drawing  here  on  a  wider  knowledge  and  experience  shared  by  all  auditors 
and readers. The Standing medieval expression <experientia docet>, which Renais(cid:173)
sance humanists took over with new gusto, reminds us that there was a time when 
experience  was  not  yet  individualized  but  still  referred  to  the  common  historical 
record.  This  is  not  to  deny  that  there  are  other  Windows  that  open  onto  private 

1  Responsio ad Sadoleti Epistolam (1539), OS 1, 460, 42. OS 1: Joannis Calvini Opera 
Selecta, vol. I, ed. P. Barth,  Munich  1926, reprint  1963. To assist the reader I have 
added line numbers to the pages when citing OS 1; for all CO references a page divi-
sion in three parts, A, B, and C, has been provided. 

279 

convictions.  The  newly  spreading  formula  <nisi  fallor>2  is  not  to  be  understood  as 
a  confession  of  ignorance  or  unreliable  memory3  but  as  an  indication  of  the 
emerging  ego  on  the  crucial  threshold  between  medieval  and  early  modern 
individuality.  It  is  the  forerunner  of  the  firm  intellectual  Claim  hidden  in  the 
phrase:  «I  am  inclined  to  believe  ...». But  unless  explicitly  documented4,  the  mere 
appeal  to experience  does  not necessarily  reveal  Calvin's  own  stance  in the  matter. 
A  further  obstacle  is  to  be  found  in  Calvin's  overriding  interest  in  establishing 
group  characteristics,  which  either  divide  mankind  into  the  two  parts  of  the  elect 
and  the  reprobate  or,  more  often,  into  three  parts,  by  counting  among  the  repro(cid:173)
bate  -  often  indiscernible  from  the  impii,  les  mechants  -  both  the  misdirected 
believers,  particularly  those  in  the papacy,  and  the  forerunners  of  modern  atheism 
who  no  longer  take  the  existence  of  God  seriously.  Whenever  Calvin  lists  the 
characteristics  of  these  two  or  three  groups  it  is  even  less  likely  that  we  will  find 
access  to his  own  unique  psychology,  revealing  his  own  psyche. 

When  not  concerned  with  the  distinctive  features  of  these  groups  Calvin  sets 
out  to  sketch  the  turbulent  conglomeration  of  sentiments,  fears,  hopes,  and  frus-
trations  of  mankind  in  general.  This  map  of  the  soul  documents  his  gifts  of  inci-
sive  Observation;  but  again,  it  does  not  necessarily  reflect  individual  self-analysis. 
A  case  in  point  is  his  Interpretation  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  (1557)  which  he  desig(cid:173)
nated  as  «the  Anatomy  of  all  parts  of  the  soul»5.  A  comprehensive  list  of  the 
emotional  forces  which  batter  the  human  soul  is  drawn  up  in  order  to  allow  for  a 
thorough  self-examination  and  to  provide  a  blueprint  to  uncover  the  hypocrisy  of 
hidden  drives.  After  all,  such  self-knowledge  feeds  the  hunger  for  the  promises  of 
God  and  leads  to  the  boldness  of  speaking  directly  to  God  in  personal  and  private 
prayer.  The  boldness  (hardiesse)  with  which  the  believer  should  speak  to  God  is 
highlighted  by  the  foil  of  shame  (pudor)  which  prevents  Calvin  from  opening  up 
and  confiding  to  anyone  eise6 -  a  factor  to  be  remembered  if  one  wants  to  under-

Cf.  CO 31, 425 C, Ps. 42,1; cf. 466 A, Ps. 47, Argumentum. 
Robert  Stupperich  finds  herein  the  acknowledgement  of  what  may  be  called 
<Gedächtnisschwäche>.  See  Robert  Stupperich,  Erasmus  von  Rotterdam  und  seine 
Welt, Berlin  1977, (de Gruyter Studienbuch), p. 36. 
See the formulation  documented in note 37. 
CO 31, 15 C, Com. Ps., Preface. For the history of Calvin's study of the Psalms and for 
the present  State of  scholarship  see  Wulfen  de Greef,  Calvijn  en  het  Oude  Testament, 
Amsterdam  1984,  pp.  22-24;  Thomas  Henry  Louis  Parker,  Calvin's  Old  Testament 
Commentaries, Edinburgh  1986, pp. 202-205. 
The Book of Psalms not only displays the great privilege of free  access to God, but also 
shows  that  it  is  perfectly  legitimate  to  place  before  God  one's  <infirmities>,  which 
shame prevents  one from  owning  up to others: «... ut  infirmitates,  quas  pudor homini-
bus fateri  prohibet, fas  ac [CO: as] liberum sit coram eo explicare», CO 31, 17 C. In his 
deathbed  speech to the Petit Conseil  (27 April  1564) Calvin seems to have changed his 
mind:  here  he  asks  forgiveness  for  his  <weaknesses>  (infirmites)  which  he  does  not 
want to deny «since what God and the angels know he is not ashamed to confess  before 
man»  (il n'a pas honte de les confesser  devant les hommes); CO 9, 890 B. This  confes(cid:173)
sion is not repeated  in his last recorded  words  spoken  the next  day to his colleagues in 
the ministry,  CO 9, 891 -894. I hesitate to assume  a shift  on such a central  point in the 

2 
3 

4 
5 

6 

280 

stand  Calvin's  passionate  critique  of  auricular  confession.  At  least  part  of  Calvin's 
reticence  about  himself  is that  his  threshold  of  shame,  his  <Schamgrenze>  is  strik-
ingly  low:  to  appear  naked  is throughout  his  works  a Situation  of  extreme  horror. 

However,  the  overriding  reason  why  it  is  so  hazardous  to  analyze  Calvin's 
psyche  is  precisely  the  fact  that  both  his  teaching  and  his  preaching  are  program-
matically  directed  at  awareness  and  mental  health.  Therefore  psychological  obser-
vations  cannot  be  interpreted  as  revealing  slips  of  the  pen:  they  are part  and  parcel 
of  a  consciously  and  consistently  developed  theological  program.  The  <cognitio 
nostri>  of  the  opening  chapter  of  the  Institutio  (1.1.1)  does  not  refer  primarily  to  a 
series  of  doctrinal  <truths>  about  the  fallen  State  of  man,  but  Stands  for  the  emo-
tionally  complex  self-analysis  which  lifts  the  lid  or  cover  of  the  soul,  allowing  for 
the  discovery  of  the  underlying  abyss  of  drives  and  frustrated 
longings.  The 
<cognitio  dei>  is  not  merely  the  intellectual  attainment  (notitia  fidei)  of  revealed 
truth  about  God7,  but  the  awakening  of  longings  (affectus)  which  enable  the 
thoughts  and  meditations  to  soar  high  to  get  a  <taste>  (gustus)  of  the  mysteries  of 
God,  even  though  they  will  never  succeed  «ultra tenuem  gustum  conscendere»8. 

Here  it  must  suffice  to  say  that  the  long-acknowledged,  basic  theme  of  the 
<secret  Operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit>  is  not  sufficiently  grasped  unless  it  is  seen 
that  the  Spirit  as  the  divine  therapist  has  access  to  the  inner  stirrings  of  the  human 
soul,  undermining  its  resistance  and  renewing  it  by  lending  it  both  appetite  and 
taste.  What  the  Institutio  shows  only  implicitly,  the  commentaries  document  too 
clearly  to  overlook,  namely  that  Calvin's  theology  is  designed  to  include  the  anal-
ysis  of  the  psychic  reverberations  and  repercussions  of  the  revealed  Word.  His 
extreme  reticence  in  speaking  about  himself  and  his  own  experiences  is in  keeping 
with  the  traditional  wisdom  that  mental  patients  are  not  helped  or  healed  when 
encouraged  to  pay  attention  to  the  autobiographical  experiences  of  the  doctor.  Yet 
he  authenticates  his  claim  that  the  Psalms  offer  the  Anatomy  of  the  soul  with  the 
important  information  that  the  biblical  account  is  in  keeping  with  his  own  experi(cid:173)
ences:  «... privato  quoque  meo  exemplo  expertus  sum  ...»9. 

It  would  be  unwarranted  to  use  this  acknowledgement  by  Calvin  as  a  license 
for  presenting  this  anatomy  as  his  own  psychogram  and  therefore  as  a  projection. 
It  is  quite  reasonable,  however,  to  assume  that  among  the  multitude  of  mental 
states  and  feelings  as  presented  in  the  Book  of  Psalms,  Calvin  would  be  inclined 
to  pay  particular  attention  to  those  which  he  found  confirmed  by  his  own  experi-

few  years between  1557 and  1564. The common theme remains the liberation from  the 
need of priestly mediation. The inconsistency  in the treatment of shame (pudor, honte), 
seems  to  point  to  the  psychological  problem  which  is  concomitant  with  the  <escape 
from  the  confessional>.  See Heiko Augustinus  Oberman, Initia  Calvini, The  Matrix of 
Calvin's  Reformation,  Amsterdam  1991, (Mededelingen  der  Koninklijke  Nederlandse 
Akademie van Wetenschappen  54.4), p. 29f [abbr.: Oberman, Initia]. 
<Sentire> — one of Calvin's favorite  verbs -  does not stand for <to judge> or <to deem>, 
not even for <to perceivo, but for <to experience> or <to be affected  by>. 
CO31,409A,Ps. 40,6. 
CO 31, 15 B, Preface. 

7 

8 
9 

281 

ence.  For  an  understanding  of  Calvin's  conversion  it is therefore  of  unquestionable 
relevance  to  establish  at  least the main  coordinates  of  this  anatomy. 

Such  a summary  must  include  three  points  of  departure: 

1.  Contrary  to  traditional  assumptions,  Calvin  does  not  present  an  abstract  tripar-
tite  anthropology  along  the  lines  of  the  demarcation  between  body,  soul,  and 
psyche  but  targets  the  disorders  of  the  <01d  Adam>  which  in  the  Pauline,  non-
Platonic  sense  pertain  to both  soul  and  body10. 

2.  As  is to  be  expected,  a  good  many  of  Calvin's  presuppositions  and  terminology 
are  traditional.  In  keeping  with  his  respect  for  Augustine  and  the  ensuing 
monastic  tradition  of  self-observation  in  the  dual  relationship  to  God  and 
fellow  human  beings, he  Stresses  that  <concupiscentia>  is  the root  of  all  evil11. 
But  against  the  tendency  to  associate  concupiscence  only  with  physical 
-
especially  sexual  -  hunger,  this  disorder  is  often  specified  as  <superbia>  (in 
the  French  Sermons:  <orgueil>  or  <haultesse>;  and  associated  with  the  expres-
sion  <dresser  les  cornes>). In  the  social  and  political  order  this  rebellion  mani-
fests  itself  in <ambitio>  and  <avaritia>,  as hunger  for  power  and  possessions. 

3.  The  most  intriguing  and  frequent  expressions  are  to  be  found  in  the  transition 
from  traditional  Latin  terminology  to  words  of  Greek  coinage.  The  image  of 
<viatores>  is  as  such  unremarkable  indeed,  but  for  Calvin  it  no  longer  has  the 
general  medieval  meaning  of  mortal  human  beings  in  contrast  with  the  <beati> 
in  heaven,  but  often  refers  to  those  pilgrims  who  have  been  guided  to  the  right 
path.  The  general  characterization  of  mankind  is  rather  that  it  is  <devius>  and 
has  lost  the right  path  or,  as Calvin  does  not  tire of  pointing  out,  is  disoriented, 
running  to  and  fro,  <huc  et  illuo.  Since  the  Fall  man  is  <off  course>  and,  in 
his  wild  surge  and  search,  <phreneticus>,  caught  in  a  <labyrinth>  and  threat-
ened  with  becoming  lost  in  the  <abyssus>12.  The  bottom  line  is  that  the 
<viator>,  instead  of  being  goal-directed,  is  at  once  wild  and  bewildered,  run(cid:173)
ning  like  a  wild  horse,  deviant  while  <off  course>  in  a  State  of  <amentia>13, 

10 

1' 

12 

See here the excellent  presentation  of Calvin's general  anthropology  provided  by Tho(cid:173)
mas Forsyth  Torrance, Calvin's Doctrine  of Man, London  1949; two years  later trans-
lated  as  Calvins  Lehre  vom  Menschen,  Zollikon-Zürich  1951. The  continued  lack  of 
scholarly  interest  in  Calvin's  <Anatomy  of  the  soul>  seems  to me  due  to the  preoccu-
pation with the theological  issue of <natural theology>, which the two final  chapters of 
Torrance should have satisfied -  and laid to rest. 
Even  when  using such traditional terminology, Calvin  is intent  on explicating  the psy-
chological  dimension:  «... mala  concupiscentia  quasi  Stupor  quidam  est  mentis»,  Psy-
chopannychia, ed. Walther Zimmerli, Leipzig  1932, (QGP  13), pp. 68, 33 -  69, 1. As in 
the case of OS  1, line numbers have been added. 
T. F. Torrance (see note  10) already pointed  to this  imagery  in passing  (English  origi(cid:173)
nal, p.  166; German translation, p.  190f)  and William J. Bouwsma made it the mainstay 
of his presentation  of the most basic conflict  in Calvin's personality. See William James 
Bouwsma, John Calvin, A Sixteenth-Century  Portrait, New York 1988. 

13  The striking -  and for modern readers at times irritating -  use of the word <absurd> for 
the  characterization  of  dissenting  opinion  may  well  be related  to this  identification  of 
sin and <mental illness>. Most striking, however, is Calvin's defense  of the  significance 

282 

and  above  all  in  need  of  the  bridle  (fraenum)  in  order  to  be  brought  back  on 
track14.  The  assumption  that  a  heretic  like  Bolsec  or  Servetus  (condemned  in 
Geneva  respectively  in  1551  and  1553)  is  a  political  threat,  does  not  neces-
sarily  reveal  -  as  usually  supposed  -  the  malicious  manipulation  of  public 
opinion;  it  is  the  <obvious>  conclusion  that  psychological  disorder  spells  pub(cid:173)
lic  rebellion. 

//.  «Me  in  vitam  tuam  reciperem»15:  The  Account  of  1539 

We  are  fortunate  to  have  two  accounts  available  from  Calvin's  pen  about  his  con(cid:173)
version  experience16,  the  first  recorded  some  six  years  after  the  event  in  1539  and 
the  second  written  some  twenty  years  afterwards  in  1552.  Both  passages  are  well 
known  in  Calvin  scholarship  but  have  been  read  primarily  in  the  light  of  the  ques(cid:173)
tion  of  dating  the  conversion  experience,  which  is  indeed  a  crucial  question  for 
every  biographer17.  Assuming  here  that  it  is  possible  to  agree  that  the  available 
evidence  and  the best  arguments  advanced  in  the  scholarly  tradition  strongly  point 
to  the  year  1533, we  will  bypass  this  issue  and  turn  instead  to  the  earliest  account 
to  look  at  the  key  points  in  his  recorded  experience  in  response  to  the  letter  of 
Cardinal  Sadolet  of  1539. 

of  the  Old  Testament  against  the  <slanderers>  who  regard  its  anthropomorphisms  as 
sheer <absurdity>. 
«Et  d'autant  plus  debvons  nous  estre  attentifz  quand  nous  voyons  que  Dieu  nous  ap-
pelle  ä la  congnoissance  de  sa verite, et  qu'il  nous  monstre  que  nous  la  debvons  tenir 
certaine.  Et  sur  cela  qu'ung  chacun  s'y  submette,  que  nous  ne  facions  point  des 
chevaulx  eschappez,  mais  que  nous  baissions  le  col  pour  porter  son  joug»,  Supple-
menta  Calviniana,  Sermons  inedits,  vol.  V: Sermons  sur le Livre  de Michee, ed. Jean 
Daniel Benoit, Neukirchen-Vluyn  1964, p.  1, 16-19; Sermon on Micah  1,1, 12 Novem(cid:173)
ber  1550.  Whereas  Calvin  can  be  shown  to  have  read  intensively  Erasmus'  Diatribe 
(1524), Luther's  De  servo  arbitrio  (1525), and  Erasmus' response  in the  Hyperaspistes 
(1526) -  probably  in the time he describes  himself  as still wavering before  his conver(cid:173)
sion  -  his  wild-horse  simile  makes  it <obvious>  (for  all  contemporaries)  that  he  sides 
with  Luther  against Erasmus. See esp. Hyperaspistes  in: Desiderii  Erasmi  Roterodami 
Opera omnia, vol.  10, Lugduni Batavorum  1706, reprint London  1962,  1287 E. 
For text and context see note 30. 
Euan Cameron has provided  a helpful  comparative  perspective  in his chapter  on «The 
Conversions  of  the  Reformers»,  where  the  threshold  is  marked  by  the  transition  from 
<reforming  theology>  to  <Reformation>.  See Euan  Cameron, The  European  Reforma(cid:173)
tion, Oxford  1991, pp.  168-185; for Calvin, p.  184f. 
The best  description  of  the  State of  scholarship  with  incisive critical  comments  is pro(cid:173)
vided by Ernst Saxer, Aberglaube,  Heuchelei  und Frömmigkeit,  eine Untersuchung  zu 
Calvins  reformatorischer  Eigenart,  Zürich  1970,  (SDGSTh  28),  pp.  139-150.  Saxer 
acknowledges  a letter  of  Gottfried  W. Locher  in helping  to disentangle  the  apparently 
contradictory  Statements  of  Calvin  and his  first  biographer,  Theodor  Beza;  see p.  144, 
note 22. 

283 

Calvin  introduces  the  theme  in  answer  to  Sadolet's  Charge  that  ambition  and 
avarice  lay  behind  his  <defection  from  the  Church>18.  After  pointing  out  that  per(cid:173)
sonal  advancement  would  have  been  much  more  certain  under  papal  tutelage  he 
rephrases  this  alleged  defection  as  <conversion>  with  the  rhetorical  question:  Do 
you  really  think  that  personal  advancement  could  lead  <to  such  a  conversion>?19 
At  this  point  it  is  already  clear  that  by  conversion  Calvin  meant  the  transfer  of 
loyalty,  the  shift  from  Submission  (obedientiam  humilitatemque)  to  the  Roman 
Church,  as required  by  Sadolet,  to obedience  to the word  of  God20. 

The  experience  of  conversion  is  not  spelled  out  until  the  epilogue  in  which 
Calvin  places  himself  before  the  tribunal  of  God  where  his  deepest  motivations 
are  laid  bare.  At  this  point  it  is  crucial  to  record  those  stages,  which  Calvin 
discerns  in his  analysis: 
1.  In  keeping  with  my  earliest  education  I  have  always  been  a  confessing  Chris(cid:173)

tian21. 

2.  This  implied  not  an  extensive  exploration  of  the  Scriptures;  after  all,  lay  folk 
should  «submit  themselves  to  obedience  to  the  Church»  (se  ad  ecclesiae 
obedientiam  subigerent)22.  This  wording  will  prove  to  be  relevant  for  the 
interpretation  of  the  account  of  1552. 

3.1 came  to fear judgment  day  as  a horrible  threat23. 
4.  This  fear  was  not  due  to  my  personal  makeup  but  to  the  doctrine  which  was 

taught  and  preached  everywhere24. 

«Postea  vero  contendis  manifestam  esse  ab ecclesia  defectionem,  quod  a vestra  socie-
tate disiuncti sunt», OS  1, 460, 28-30. 
«Putesne fame fuisse  adactos, ut a vobis demigrarent, et rebus desperatis, ad istam con-
versionem, velut ad novas tabulas profugisse?»,  OS  1, 461, 22-24. 
«Et  adhuc  obedientiam  humilitatemque  vestram  nobis  venditas,  quod  vos  retineat  ec(cid:173)
clesiae  veneratio,  quo  minus  ad  exigenda  haec  flagitia  manum  admoveatis.  Quid  ho-
mini  christiano  cum  ista  praevaricatrice  obedientia,  quae  verbo  Dei  licentiose  con-
tempto obsequia sua defert hominum vanitati?», OS  1, 475, 31-36. 
«Ego, Domine, ut a puero fueram  educatus, christianam  semper fidem professus  sum», 
OS  1,  484,  9f.  Calvin  Stresses  the  same  point  in  David's  life:  «Certe  iam  a  puero... 
formatus  erat ad pietatem», CO 31, 319 A, Ps. 32,4. 
«...  plebeiis  ingeniis  non  altiorem  intelligentiam  convenire,  quam  ut  se  ad  ecclesiae 
obedientiam subigerent», OS  1, 484, 17f;  cf. 475, 31-36; see note 20 above. 
«Exspectabam  futurum  resurrectionis  diem,  sed cuius  memoriam, velut  rei  infaustissi-
mae, abominarer», OS  1, 484,  28f. 
«Atque hie  sensus  non  mihi  privatim  domi  natus  erat,  sed  ex  ea  doctrina,  quae  tum  a 
populi  christiani  magistris populo passim  tradebatur, coneeptus», OS  1, 484, 29-32. In 
a translation  widely  used  in the English  speaking  world, John  C. Olin slips  at this  one 
crucial point by changing the denial <not> into <not only> and by rendering the locative 
<domi>  as  if  Calvin  had  written  <dominari>:  «I  antieipated  a  future  resurrection,  but 
hated  to  think  of  it,  as  being  an  event  most  dreadful.  And  this  feeling  not  only  had 
dominion  over  me  in private,  but  was  derived  from  the  doctrine  which  was  then  uni-
formly  delivered  to the people by their Christian teachers», lohn  Calvin  & lacopo  Sa-
doleto,  A Reformation  Debate,  Sadoleto's  Letter  to the  Genevans  and  Calvin's  Reply, 
ed. John Charles Olin, 7th printing, Grand Rapids, Mich.  1987, p. 87. 

284 

5.  Forgiveness  of  sins  (dementia)25  was  made  conditional  on  our  worthiness; 
absolution  in  the  confessional  could  not  bring  solace  because  of  the  require-
ment  of  a  satisfaction  which  could  not  stand  up  to  the  scrutiny  of  a  severe 
judge:  «The  more  I  scrutinized  myself  the  more  my  conscience  plagued  me  so 
that  I could  only  find  relief  by  means  of  suppression»26. 

6.  Then  a very  different  (Reformation)  doctrine  reached  me.  For  a time  I  was  held 
back  by  my  respect  for  the  Church;  «but  once  I  had  opened  my  ears  and 
allowed  myself  to  be  taught,  I  learned  that  this  fear  of  disregarding  the  author-
ity  of  the  Church  was  groundless»27. 

7.  The  last  obstacle  feil  when  Calvin  learned  to  distinguish  between  the  Church  as 
defined  by  the  Bishop  of  Rome  and  the  domain  of  the  Kingdom  of  Christ,  laid 
low  by  tyranny28. 

8. The  conclusion  of  the conversion  account  also  contains  its  climax.  Once  Calvin 
had  reached  this  point  in  his  quest  he  realized,  in  a  flash  of  illumination 
(tanquam  illata  luce), how  deeply  he  had  really  sunk29:  «Profoundly  shaken  by 
the  realization  of  my  present  fallen  State  (miseria)  and  even  more  by  the 
imminent  threat  of  eternal  death  I  could  not  but  forswear  my  former  life, 
though  not  without  bitter  tears, and  render  myself  into your  hands»30. 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

I agree  with the findings  of Andre M. Hugo that  Calvin's  commentary  on  Seneca's  De 
dementia  does not allow  for  the conclusion  that he was already  <evangelical>.  Never-
theless  the choice  of  the theme  which  would be  so important  for  his  conversion  is not 
likely  to  have  been  a  mere  coincidence.  See Andre  Malan  Hugo,  Calvijn  en  Seneca, 
een inleidende  Studie van  Calvijns  Commentaar  op Seneca,  De dementia,  anno  1532, 
Groningen  1957, p.  76f. 
«Ac  quo  me  propius  considerabam,  eo  acrioribus  pungebatur  aculeis  conscientia,  ut 
non aliud restaret solatium, quam me ipsum oblivione ludere», OS  1, 485, 10-13. 
«Una praesertim  res  animum  ab Ulis meum  avertebat,  ecclesiae  reverentia.  Verum  ubi 
aliquando  aures  aperui,  meque  doceri  passus  sum,  supervacuum  fuisse  timorem  illum 
intellexi, ne quid ecclesiae maiestati decederet», OS  1, 485, 23-26. 
Calvin  <grew  up> when  the  reformation-debate  had  already  moved  from  the  issue  of 
indulgences  and justification  to  ecclesiology,  obedience  to  the  Church.  In  1526 Eras-
mus points out that the authority  of the Church was already  his focus  two years  earlier 
in  1524, in  his  <Disputation>,  i. e.,  in  his  Diatribe  on  free  will:  «... quaero  an  aliquid 
momenti  debeat  habere  veterum  et  ecclesiae  auctoritas.  Hie  erat  scopus  disputationis 
meae, ad quem oportebat argumenta tua dirigere», Erasmus (as note  14), 1298 C. 
Calvin must have been held back (avertebat) by such a penetrating contrast as Erasmus 
suggested  in  the  sarcastic juxtaposition  of  the  <See  of  Rome>  and  the  -  dissenting  -
<See of Wittenberg;»: Is it such a monstrous  crime, Erasmus snidely asks, that when we 
encounter  some  kind  of  difficult  passage  [literally  <ambiguity>,  in  contrast  with 
Luther's  claritas  scripturae]  «we,  simple  minds,  prefer  to  listen  to  the  See  of  Rome 
rather than to the See of Wittenberg, a dissenter at that?», Erasmus,  1303 D. 
«...  prostratum  denique  fuisse  Christi  regnum,  quum  erectus  fuisset  hie  prineipatus», 
OS  1,486,  12f. 
«Quum  iam  animus  meus  ad  seriam  attentionem  comparatus  foret,  hie  vero, tanquam 
illata luce, animadverti,  in quo errorum  sterquilinio  fuissem  volutatus, quot  inde sordi-
bus ac maculis foedatus  essem», OS  1, 486, 19-23. 
«Quod  ergo  officii  mei  fuit,  eius, in qua  prolapsus  eram, miseriae, multo etiam  magis 
eius,  quae  mihi  imminebat,  aeternae  mortis  agnitione  vehementer  consternatus,  nihil 

285 

9.  Calvin  contrasts  this  conversion  with  the  defection  of  which  Sadolet  had 
accused  him.  This  becomes  clear  from  the  final  sentence:  «And  now,  oh  Lord, 
no  defense  is  left  but  to  beseech  you  to  forgive  me  and  discount  the  horrible 
defection  from  your  word  from  which  you  have  liberated  me  once  and  for  all 
(semel)  through  your  wondrous  goodness»31. 

///.  «Subita  conversione  ad  docilitatem  subegit»32:  The  Account  of 

1552 

Before  we  are  in  a  position  to  draw  conclusions  about  the  characteristics  of  Cal-
vin's  conversion  experience  we  must  turn  to his  second  description,  the  account  of 
1552. 

it  should  be  noted 

Against  the  backdrop  of  Calvin's  general  reticence  he  proved  to  be  decidedly 
frank  and  personal  in  his  rejoinder  to  the  accusations  of  Cardinal  Sadolet.  This  is 
even  more  evident  in  his  biographical  sketch  in  the Preface  to  the  Commentary  on 
the  Psalms.  Though  we  will  concentrate  on  the  central  passage  in  this  second 
account  of  his  conversion, 
surrounding 
autobiographical  passages  Calvin  is  surprisingly  generous  with  Statements  about 
his  own  character.  Thus  he  owns  up 
to  being  <by  nature>  awkward  and 
unpolished,  <subrusticus>,  which  the  French  Version  renders  as  «un  peu  sauvage  et 
honteux»33.  Before  we  have  fully  fathomed  the  füll  implications  of  this  admission, 
Calvin  goes  on  to  say  that  when  he  merely  wanted  to  pass  through  Geneva,  Guil-
laume  Farel  put  the  fear  of  God  in  him:  <terrore  perculsus>  he  decided  to  stay 
though  not  to  accept  a  pastoral  office,  <well  aware  that  I  am  by  nature  reserved 
and  timid>34. 

that 

in 

the 

prius habui quam  ut damnata, non sine gemitu  ac lacrymis, superiore  vita, me  in vitam 
tuam  reciperem»,  OS  1, 486, 23-27. I am inclined  to interpret  the unusual  formulation 
«in  vitam  tuam  reciperem»  with  reference  to  the  preceding  emphasis  on  John  17,3: 
«Non  enim  fallere  posset  oraculum  illud:  Esse  hanc  vitam  aeternam,  nosse  te  verum 
Deum,  et  quem  misisti  Iesum  Christum  (Ioann.  17,3)», OS  1, 482,  18-20. Intended  is 
doubtlessly  the <Great Awakening>, the <resurrection> of the soul (before,  in, and  after 
death):  «Ergo,  qui  in  Christum  credunt,  quum  prius  mortui  essent,  incipiunt  vivere, 
quia  fides  spiritualis  est  animae  resurrectio,  et  animam  ipsam  quodammodo  animat  ut 
vivat Deo ...», CO 47, 262 C, Com. John 11,25. 
The  briefest  formulation  of  the <Great  Awakening>  is  to be  found  in  the  commentary 
on  Isaiah  19,22:  «Hinc  collige,  conversionem  esse  quasi  resurrectionem  ab  aeterna 
morte», CO 36, 347 B. 
«Et nunc, Domine, quid  aliud misero mihi  superest quam  ut deprecationem  tibi pro de-
fensione  offeram,  ne horrendam  illam  a verbo tuo defectionem  ad calculum  revoces, a 
qua me semel mirifica  tua benignitate vindicasti?», OS  1, 486, 27-31. 
For text and context see note 39. 
CO  31, 22  C;  cf.  21  C;  in  Dutch  <een  schuwe  binnenvetter>,  in  German  <ungehobelt 
und scheu>, in English perhaps best <shy and without social grace>. 
«... et verecundiae et timiditatis meae conscius ...», CO 31, 25 B, Preface. 

286 

Twice  more  exactly  the  same  point  is  driven  home  in  the  same  Preface.  He 
admits  that  when  he  was  thrown  out  of  Geneva  three  years  later,  he  was  inordi-
nately  relieved,  indeed  delighted  -  due  to  his  psychological  makeup:  «Ego,  qui 
natura  timido,  molli  et  pusillo  animo  me  esse  fateor  ... turbulenta  eiectione  plus 
quam  decebat  laetatus  sim»35.  Two  years  later,  the  same  <timidity>  makes  him 
give  in  again,  this  time  to  the  pressure  of  Martin  Bucer  who  enlists  him  for  the 
Strasbourg  Reformation  by  terrifying  him  with  the  example  of  Jonah36.  When 
called  back  to  Geneva  in  1541  it  was  the  same  timidity  (mea  timiditas)  which 
made him  hesitate.  Only  the fear  (metus)  of  failing  in his  duties made  him  over-
come «the horrible prospect of return which, God knows, filled  me with tears and 
trembling  (anxietate)»37. 

It  is  before  turning  to  these  stages  on  his  path  as  a  reformer  -  in  Geneva 
(1536-1538), in Strasbourg  (1538-1541), and again in Geneva  (since  1541) -  that 
Calvin places  the description  of his conversion,  i.e., the way  in which  he discov-
ered this path. 

As he makes perfectly  clear, by nature he was most unsuited for public  office. 
And, as the story leading up to his conversion shows, he was not only unsuited but 
also not  intended  for  the career  of  a reformer.  He records  his curriculum  vitae in 
the  Preface  to the  Commentary  on  the  Psalms  exactly  because  he  sees  in  David, 
conscripted  from  behind the oxen (rusticus!)  and a man  not born to become king, 
a  mirror  of  the  unexpected  turn  in  his  own  life.  Though  originally  intended  for 
theology, his father  changed  his mind  and had the young  Calvin take up law. But 
when  Calvin  obediently  tried  to  apply  himself  to  his  legal  studies,  «God  gave 
another  direction  to my  life  through  the hidden  bridle  of  his providence»  (arcano 
providentiae  suae fraeno)38.  In this introductory  sentence lies the key to the riddle 
of  the  second  conversion  account  which  has  puzzled  Calvin  scholars  over  the 
years. Early  in his  studies, Calvin  reports, he was still  so addicted to the supersti-
tions  of  the papacy  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  free  himself  from  this  quagmire: 
though  for  his  young  age  remarkably  intent  on  sticking  to  his  path,  «subita  con-
versione ad docilitatem subegit»39. 

The best known part  of this much-studied  passage  is doubtlessly  <subita con-
versione>.  Rendered  as <sudden  conversion>  in  the  sense  of  radical  change  from 

35  C0  31.25B/C. 
36 

37 

38 

39 

«Ionae  itaque  exemplo  quod  proposuerat  territus  in  docendi  munere perrexi»,  CO 31, 
25 C. 
«... quanto tarnen cum moerore quantis lacrymis et quanta anxietate, Dominus mihi op-
timus testis est...», CO 31, 27 A. 
«...  magnopere  tarnen  profuit,  quasi  in  speculo  cernere  tum  vocationis  meae  exordia, 
tum  continuum  functionis  cursum:  ut  quidquid  praestantissimus  ille  rex  ac  propheta 
pertulit, mihi ad imitationem  fuisse  propositum  certius agnoscerem», CO 31, 21 A. «... 
Deus  tarnen  arcano  providentiae  suae  fraeno  cursum  meum  alio  tandem  reflexit»,  CO 
31.21B. 
«Ac  primo  quidem,  quum  superstitionibus  papatus  magis  pertinaciter  addictus  essem, 
quam ut facile  esset  e tarn profundo  luto me extrahi, animum  meum, qui pro  aetate ni-
mis obduruerat, subita conversione ad docilitatem subegit», CO 31,21 C. 

287 

one  moment  to  the  other,  this  event  has  been  placed  by  Calvin  biographers  on  the 
time-line  of  the known  stages  of  Calvin's  development.  However,  as his  use  of  the 
adjective  <subitus>,  or  of  the  adverb  <subito>,  shows40,  Calvin  does  not  define  his 
conversion  as  <sudden>  in  the  temporal  sense  of  the  word,  but  as  <unexpected>. 
Just  as  its  synonym  <repente>, <subito>  refers  to  an  event  which  takes  place  <prae-
ter  spem>  (Rom.  1,18)41,  <against  all  expectations>,  intended  to  make  the  point 
that  <the  event>  is  not  the  conversion  of  Calvin  but  the  conversion  brought  about 
in  Calvin. 

In  keeping  with  this  Observation  is  the  fact  that  conversion  does  not  necessar-
ily  mean  a  religious  change  of  heart  (resipiscentia),  but  can  mean  any  alteration 
(mutatio),  such  as  the  miraculous  change  of  mind  in  David's  scheming  enemies, 
when  he  escaped  suddenly  the  clutches  of  his  persecutors,  <repente>  and  <praeter 
spem>42.  Brevity  in  time  can  very  well  be  an  aspect  of  God's  miraculous  interven-
tion.  Indeed,  the  rule  of  Christ  over  the  whole  world  was  initiated  when,  through 
the  preaching  of  the  apostles,  the  Gospel  reached  the  nations  around  the  world 
<with  lightning  speed>43.  The  conversion  of  the  world,  however,  is  not  to  be  un-

Paul  Sprenger  merely  draws  on  the  vocabulary  of  the  Institutio.  See  Paul  Sprenger, 
Das Rätsel um die Bekehrung Calvins, Neukirchen Kreis Moers  1960, (BGLRK  11), p. 
99f  [abbr.:  Sprenger,  Rätsel].  As  a  more  immediate,  and  therefore  the  more  relevant 
and  reliable  resource,  we  will  draw  primarily  on  the  Psalms  commentary  and  the 
French sermons on the Psalms. 
See  for  <repente>  and  <subito>  CO  31, 99  B,  Ps.  9,7-8;  106 A,  Ps. 9,18;  114  C, Ps. 
10,8;  140B,Ps.  14,5; 174 A, Ps. 18,8; 311 B, Ps. 31,21; 459 C, Ps. 46, Argumentum. 
The <subita conversio> is part of the Augustinian  epistemological  tradition  which high-
lights  the  element  of  <suddenness>  in every  true  act  of  Cognition  when  <sapientia>  or 
wisdom  breaks  into  our  world  of  confused  sense  perception.  In  mystical  sources 
<subito>  expresses  the  passivity  of  the  mystic  in  the  <visio  Dei>  and  the  unexpected 
nature  of  the gift  of  illumination.  For  references  see Heiko Augustinus  Oberman, The 
Dawn  of  the  Reformation,  Essays  in  Late  Medieval  and  Early  Reformation  Thought, 
2nd  ed.,  Edinburgh  1992,  p.  111, with  notes  14 and  15. In  the  commentary  on  John 
1,12  <subito>  articulates  the  act  of  amazing  grace  leading  up  to  the  conclusion: 
«Incredibilis  enim rerum  conversio  tunc facta  est, quum Christus ex lapidibus  excitavit 
Deo filios», CO 47, 11 C. 
The connection between subito and praeter spem, <beyond expectation>, is existentially 
present  in  the  life  of  Rebecca.  After  twenty  years  of  sterility  God  suddenly  turned  to 
her: «... mais au bout de vingt ans, Dieu vient  soudain  ...», CO 58, 29 A/B; Sermon on 
Gen. 35,20. 
«Conversio  hie non  pro resipiscentia,  sed tantum  pro diversa  voluntate  aeeipitur:  ac si 
dixisset, fuisse  in arbitrio hostis, quidquid dietasset libido, perficere.  Unde melius appa-
ret quam  admirabilis  fuerit  quae repente praeter  spem sequuta est mutatio», CO 31, 86 
A,Ps. 7, 13. 
«Porro quum  orbem  terrarum  non  ante  sibi  Deus  subegerit,  quam  dum  evangelii prae-
dicatione  sponte se passi sunt in ordinem cogi qui prius indomiti fuerant,  conversionem 
hanc  non  nisi  Christi  duetu  et  auspieiis  faetam  esse,  colligere  licet.  Si  quis  obiieiat, 
nunquam  totum  orbem  fuisse  conversum;  facilis  solutio  est,  tempus  quo  repente  per 
evangelium  passim  innotuit  Deus,  conferri  cum  veteri  illo  statu,  dum  sui  notitiam 
Iudaeae  finibus  inclusam  tenuit.  Seimus enim  fulgetri  instar  celeriter  Christum  ab ortu 

40 

41 

42 

43 

288 

derstood  as  an  event  that  took  place  in  one  moment  of  time  but  rather  as  one 
which  continues  through  the  following  centuries44. 

To  summarize  our  findings,  the  <sudden  conversion>  refers  to  the  action  of 
God  as  unexpected  Intervention.  Whereas  the  first  account  of  1539  reports  on  the 
horizontal  search  for  truth  by  trial  and error  with  its  story  of  growing  inner  turmoil 
and  increasing  leanings  towards  the  evangelical  movement,  the  account  of  1552 
highlights  the  vertical  dimension  of  conversion  as  unprepared  illumination  from 
above.  For  the historian  who  sets  out  to  reconstruct  Calvin's  road  to reformation  in 
time  and  Space  the  first  account  is  richer  in  psychological  Windows,  whereas  the 
second  account  anchors  the  experience  of  conversion  more  firmly  in  Calvin's 
curriculum  vitae. 

IV.  «Ad  docilitatem  subegit»45:  The  Great  Awakening 

The  conversion  of  individual  Christians  is  only  part  of  the  larger  global  strategy  of 
mission  by  the  word  directed  at  Submission  of  the  world.  <Tolerance>  is  a  concept 
often  used  by  Calvin,  not  in  its  modern  sense  of  the  duty  of  a majority  to  grant  the 
right  of  dissent  to  a  minority,  but  as  the  duty  of  a  minority  to  endure  amidst  the 
travails  caused  by  a  majority  unwilling  to  accept  God's  dominion46.  The  resulting 
persecution  calls  for  strict  obedience  in  the  ranks  of  the  Underground  movement. 
<Docility>  is  at best  a weak,  actually  a misleading  rendering:  conversion  is  at  once 
Submission  and  the  vocation  to  endure  and  persevere  in  what  Calvin  called  <toler-

in occasum  penetrasse,  ut undique  gentes  in ecclesiam  accerseret», CO 31, 235 B, Ps. 
22,28. 
«... orbis conversio de qua loquutus est, non momentanea tantum erit, sed per continuas 
aetates  propagabitur»,  CO  31, 236 B, Ps. 22,31.  See  also  the  vision  formulated  in  the 
Catechism  of  1537, where the Our Father  is interpreted  («Ton regne advienne»); OS 1, 
407, 15-38. 
For text and context see note 39. 
«Est quidem aspera haec conditio, sed quia Deo visum est, ut nos continua militia exer-
ceat,  Christi  regnum  circumdare  hostibus,  paremus  nos  ad  tolerantiam  et  mansuetudi-
nem»,  CO  32,  162  B, Ps.  110,2. Because  of  his  Ratschlag  of  1510  in  defense  of  the 
Jewish  books, Johannes  Reuchlin  is  often  named in the  same breath  as Calvin's Oppo(cid:173)
nent Sebastian Castellio, as one of the founding  fathers  of religious tolerance. See Reli(cid:173)
giöse  Toleranz,  Dokumente  zur  Geschichte  einer  Forderung,  ed.  Hans  Rudolf  Gug-
gisberg,  Stuttgart-Bad  Cannstatt  1984, (Neuzeit  im  Aufbau  4), pp. 45-57;  cf.  notes on 
p.  15. Yet the traditional  meaning  of the  word <tolerance> can still be discerned  in that 
the  <Sanftmut>  intended  is  first  to  come  from  the  side  of  the  Jews. In  a little  noticed 
primer  on  the  significance  of  modern  rhetoric  for  homiletics  -  completed  seven  years 
earlier  in  January  1503 -  Reuchlin  discusses  the  use  of  <loci  communes>  for  moving 
the  audience 
tolerance: 
«Conversione  atrocitatis  in nos ipsos vel nobis coniunctos, si simili fortunae  subiicere-
mur  ...  Tolerantia  magni,  excelsi,  et  fortis  animi  et  patientis  incommodorum»,  Liber 
Congestorum de Arte Praedicandi, Pforzheim  1504, fol. [b VIv], 

the  sense  of  commiseration)  and 

to  conversion 

(in 

289 

ance>47.  These  preliminary  observations  provide  the  right  access  to  a  clause  that 
had  to  be  baffling  as  long  as  one  tried  to  translate  it  with  the  help  of  dictionaries 
for  classical  or medieval  Latin. 

The  French  parallel  version  -  which  if  not  written  by  Calvin  himself,  was 
penned  by  a  disciple  who  was  steeped  in  his  thought  -  helps  to  strip  away  the  last 
remnant  of  sweetness  which  a  later  pietistic  tradition  has  associated  with  conver-
sion:  «...  par  une  conversion  subite  il  domta  et  rangea  ä  docilite  mon  coeur  ...»48. 
In  keeping  with  Calvin's  favorite  image  of  the  <wild  horses>  these  verbs  <domp-
ter>  and  <ranger>  refer  to  the  taming  of  wild  animals  to  be  placed  and  kept  on 
track  by  receiving  a  <fraenum>  or  bridle.  A  whole  series  of  other  images  crystal-
lize  around  this  nucleus.  Without  re-direction  (rectitudo  legis),  the  <wild  horses> 
get  lost  and  rush  about  <to  and  fro>  in  flexuosas  vias49:  they  are  caught  and  per-
plexed  in  the  <labyrinth>50,  tire  out  and  finally  lose  their  way  completely,  to  be 
drowned  in the  <abyss>51. 

Calvin's  conversion  accounts  allow  for  conclusions  which  throw  light  in  three 
different  directions:  (1)  on  his  personality,  (2)  on  the  matrix  of  his  religious 
thought,  and  (3)  on the question  of  his  impact. 

1. There  are  two  modern  assumptions  which  Calvin  did  not  claim  for  his  con(cid:173)
version:  first,  he  did  not  <discover  religion>  or  -  in  the  tradition  of  Augustine  -
abandon  a  lifestyle  of  moral  dissolution.  Second,  and  even  more  important  for  a 
characterization  of  Calvin,  he  does  not  record  a  change  in  his  basic  psychological 
chemistry:  before  and  after  his  conversion  he  knew  fear  in  all  the  gradations 
which  the  Latin  language  suggests  on  the  escalating  line  from  <metus>  and  <timi-
ditas>  via  <timor>  to  <anxietas>  and  <terror>.  His  sense  of  being  threatened  is  not 
restricted  to  subtle  psychological  anguish.  He  later  remembers  that  he  once  was 
stricken  by  fear  (destresses)  during  the  early  wave  of  persecutions  in  France52. 

In the early  Romans  commentary  for  which  the basis  was laid  in the years  1536-1539 
and  which  was  published  with  some  changes  in  1540  (1539?)  and  revised  by  Calvin 
himself  in  1551  and  1556,  we  find  tolerantia  used  both  as  the  tolerance  of  God  mit-
igating his judgment  (Rom. 3,25)  and as the perseverance of the Saints (Rom. 2,7). See 
Iohannis  Calvini  Commentarius  in  Epistolam  Pauli  ad  Romanos,  ed.  Thomas  Henry 
Louis Parker, Leiden  1981, (SHCT 22), p. 74, 70-72; p. 41, 57. 

48  C0  31,22C,Preface. 
49  CO 31, 200 C, Ps. 19,8. 
50  CO 31, 368 C, Ps. 37,5. CO 32, 642 A; Sermon  14 on Ps.  119, 23 April  1553. Cf.  CO 

47 

290 

52, 447 B. 

51  C0  31,368C,Ps. 37,5. 
52 

See  Supplementa  Calviniana,  Sermons  inedits,  vol. I:  Predigten  über  das  2. Buch  Sa-
muelis, ed. Hanns Rücken,  Neukirchen  Kreis Moers  1936-1961, p. 122, 28; Sermon on 
II  Samuel  5,17;  quoted  by  Paul  Sprenger  to  argue  for  an  early  conversion  date,  c. 
1527/1528; Sprenger, Rätsel, pp. 29-33, 80. This passage is misunderstood  when taken 
as the  admission of Calvin to have been a <Nicodemite>  in his early years. His point is 
rather  that  the  small  Underground  movement  would  have  been  easily  wiped  out  if  he 
had  not  maintained  silence: I  would  rather  have  had  my  tongue  cut  out than  to  speak 
out. Even David was «pavoribus vehementer concussus» -  a powerful  consolation;  CO 
31, 337 C, Ps. 34,5. 

The  other  incidents  pertain  to  the  fear  of  falling  short  and  not  measuring  up  to  the 
Standards  set  by  the  Church  or  -  later  -  by  the  word  of  God  as  applied  to  him  by 
Farel  and  Bucer.  Calvin  was,  and  remained  on  intimate  terms  with  fear53.  In  the 
conversion  account,  the  incapacitating  aspect  of  this  fearfulness  plays  a  special 
role. 

Generally  it  can  be  said  that  for  Calvin  the  primary  connotation  of  conversion 
is  not  salvation  but  vocation  as  a  call54  to  Service55.  This  conversion  comes  <sub-
ito>, i.e.,  <praeter  spem>,  against  all  expectations,  exactly  because  it  could  hardly 
have  come  to  someone  less  suited  to  public  office  -  an  insight  not  reflected  in 
later  biographies. 

2.  One  might  be  tempted  to  leave  the  matter  thus  and  privatize  Calvin's  frank 
admission  of  fearfulness  were  it  not  that  his  insistence  on  the  <timor  Dei>  or 
<crainte  de  Dieu>  became  a  characteristic  theme  of  Calvinist  teaching.  In  this 
teaching,  Calvin  was  conscious  of  deviating  (meo  quidem  iudicio56)  not  only  from 
medieval  but  also from  prevailing  reformation  thought. 

In  the  first  version  of  his  Institutio  (1536)  Calvin  discusses  conversion  in  the 
context  of  penance  and  insists  that  the  horrible  sense  of  fear  of  God  is  not  merely 
operative  in  an  initial  phase,  overcome  and  left  behind  by  the  consolation  which 
comes  with  conversion57  or  replaced  by  trust  (fiducia)  in  the  mercy  of  God58. 
Penance  or  mortification  is  as  much  part  of  post-conversion  life  as  vivification 
and  continues  to  engender  in  us  a  <verus  ac  sincerus  timor  Dei>59.  This  is  the 

53 

54 

In a penetrating essay  Eugenie Droz points to «le caractere craintif  de Calvin». Wisely 
Droz  relates  this  to  the  inflexibility  of  Calvin  (intransigeant),  who  insists  that  the 
<dissimulators>  make  a  choice  between  martyrdom  or  exile.  Eugenie  Droz,  Calvin  et 
les Nicodemites, in: E. Droz, Chemins de l'heresie, textes et documents, vol.  1, Geneva 
1970, pp.  131-171; 132. 
In  the  preceding  commentary  on  Isaiah  (1551)  <conversion>  is  defined  as  the  <Great 
Awakening>; CO 36, 347 B, Isa.  19,22. See further Oberman, Initia, p. 24. 

55  On the  meaning  of  <vocation>  see the  definition  in the  explanation  of  Rom.  4,17; ed. 

Parker (as note 47), p. 94, 83-86. 

56  OS  1, 171, 20; see note 59 below. 
57  With  genuine  respect  Calvin  reports  the  medieval  contritionist  view  of  the  <docti qui-
dam viri, etiam  ante  haec  tempora>:  «Ubi  scilicet  homo peccati  conscientia  prostratus, 
ac  Dei  timore  percussus, postea  in  Dei  bonitatem,  in misericordiam,  gratiam,  salutem 
quae est per Christum,  respiciens  sese erigit,  respirat,  animum  colligit  et velut  a morte 
in vitam redit», OS  1, 170, 15-18. 

58  Turning  to unnamed  <alii> who <subsume> or  identify  faith  and  penance, Calvin  most 
likely has Luther in mind;  cf.  Sermo de poenitentia  (1518), WA  1, 323, 33f;  De capti-
vitate Babylonica  (1520), WA 6, 545,  1-8.  The  editor of OS  1 refers  to the  Confessio 
Augustana  (1530), Art. XII; see OS  1, 170, note 83. 
«Est itaque, meo quidem iudicio, poenitentia carnis nostrae veterisque hominis  mortifi-
catio,  quam  in  nobis  efficit  verus  ac  sincerus  timor  Dei»,  OS  1,  171, 20-22.  Calvin's 
conclusion that penance (mortification)  and forgiveness  (faith) form the two chief  parts 
of  the  one  Gospel  (tota  evangelii  summa,  OS  1,  171, 32), Supports  the thesis  of Gott(cid:173)
fried  W. Locher,  that  already  in  1536  Calvin  knew  Zwingli's  Commentarius  (1525): 
«Calvin  muß  Zwinglis  Hauptwerk,  den  Commentarius  gekannt  haben;  in  der  Erstaus(cid:173)
gabe  wie  in  den  späteren  Fassungen  der  Institutio  finden  sich  eindeutige  Anklänge», 

59 

291 

<crainte  de  Dieu>60,  best  rendered  as  a  trembling  before  God's  holy  majesty  and 
not to  be  confused  with  the fear  of  the  unbelievers.  Yet  it is  the  same  rule  of  terror 
for  all:  the  unbelievers  are  <broken>  while  the  believers  are  <bent>61.  In  keeping 
with  this  emphasis  on  the  function  of  fear  in  the  Christian  life62  is  Calvin's  under-
standing  of  the righteousness  of  God,  which  in contrast  to Luther's,  is  an  unchang-
ing  property  in  God  (active)  and  not  the  gift  of  faith63.  The  proximity  and  close 

Gottfried  Wilhelm Locher,  Die Zwinglische Reformation  im Rahmen  der europäischen 
Kirchengeschichte, Göttingen  1979, p. 627. See especially  Zwingli's  formulation:  «Est 
ergo evangelii pars altera poenitentia  ...», ZIII 702, 1 lf.  However, not <timor> but Spir(cid:173)
itual  renewal  is  Zwingli's  theme.  For  a  more  comprehensive  comparison  between 
Zwingli,  Luther,  and  Calvin  <on  penance>  See  Gottfried  Wilhelm  Locher,  Zwingli's 
Thought, New Perspectives, Leiden  1981, (SHCT 25), pp. 190-195. 
«Comme  les  infideles  en  craignant  Dieu  sont  esperdus  et  tellement  abbatus,  qu'ils  ne 
peuvent  avoir  le courage  d'approcher  de lui: aussi, ä l'opposite,  il y a une  crainte libe(cid:173)
rale en ceux qui sont gouvernez par l'Esprit de Dieu, qui empörte reverence ä sa parole, 
pour les faire  trembler  devant icelle», CO 32, 663 A;  Sermon  15 on Ps.  119, 30 April 
1553. 
When pondering the different  modes in which the <timor Dei> strikes the elect  and the 
reprobate, the element of <sincerity> is found  in the fact that in the case of the elect this 
trembling  respect  is  not  extorted  but  rendered  <sponte>:  «Porro, videndum  est  de  qua 
timoris specie loquatur, nam Deus communiter electos etiam suos timore subigit ad ob-
sequium.  Sed  quia  suum  erga  eos  rigorem  temperat,  et  simul  emollit  lapidea  ipsorum 
corda,  ut sponte et placide  se submittant, proprie non dicitur eos metu cogere. Erga re-
probos diversum agendi modum tenet, quia enim inflexibilis  est eorum durities, ut faci-
lius  sit eos frangi  quam corrigi, violenter  indomitam ipsorum contumaciam  subigit...», 
CO 31, 107 A/B, Ps. 9,21. Cf. Rom. 5,3; ed. Parker (as note 47), p. 105, 2-4. 
In  the  earliest  version  of  his  Romans  commentary,  Calvin  firmly  connected  genuine 
fear  (timor) with respect (reverentia) for God: «Fieri enim nequit quin ubi est serius Dei 
timor, talis quoque sit nominis eius reverentia», ed. Parker, p. 20, 25f.  The opposite of 
this  proper  <Christian>  fear,  is not  the  medieval  timor  servilis  but  complete  disregard 
for  God.  So is perjury  for  the godless a game (ludus), whereas the faithful  avoid it like 
the plague: «... gravius mille mortibus exhorrent», Rom.  1,9;  ed. Parker, p. 20, 25.  Cf. 
the  revealing  comment  on Rom.  2,25: «Nam  quicunque  serio  Dei  timore  tactus  est  et 
affectus,  nunquam in caelum oculos attollere audebit...», ed. Parker, p. 53, 45-47. 
Luther's description  of his exegetical breakthrough  by  interpreting  the righteousness of 
God  as <iustitia passiva>  (grasped  in  faith),  articulated  in the Praefatio  to the first  vol-
ume  of  his  Latin  works  (Wittenberg  1545; WA  54,  185,  17-20;  186,  3-8),  may  very 
well have been  read  by Calvin. If  so, he contradicts  the validity  of Luther's  Interpreta(cid:173)
tion  with  an inversion  of terminology:  «Caeterum  iustitiam Dei non  interpretor  active, 
qua donat suos electos, spiritu suo eos regenerans: sed vitae sanctitatem quae ei proba-
tur», CO 31, 650 A, Ps. 69,28. Cf.  CO 31, 658 C, Ps. 71,14; 660 A, Ps. 71,16; 661 B/C, 
Ps.  71,19.  Always  careful  to  interpret  the  expression  <iustitia  Dei>  in  terms  of  the 
changing  biblical  context,  Calvin,  in  interpreting  the  Psalms,  does  relate  <iustitia>  to 
<fides>, yet not to the faith  of the believer but to the <active> faithfulness  of God as the 
stable foundation  of  salvation. See his exegesis of Ps. 7,18, CO 31, 87 B; cf.  Ps. 22,32, 
CO 31, 237 B. When the iustitia Dei is interpreted as the goodness of God (pro bonitate 
accipitur), it means again an attribute of God; Ps. 51,16, CO 31, 520 C. Cf.  CO 31, 247 
A; 301 A; 364 B. As for Luther  it is also crucial for  Calvin  that the iustitia fidei  is the 
iustitia  Christi  (Rom.  3,22;  ed. Parker,  p. 70, 43f)  and  that  <we are justified  in  Christ 
extra  nos>,  Rom.  3,21; ed.  Parker,  p. 69,  86f.  But  the  believer  and his  works  (double 

292 

alliance  of  Calvin  with  Luther  in  his confrontation  with  the  medieval  papal  church 
and  its  teachings  is  beyond  question:  he  continues  to  honor  Luther  as  the  Inceptor 
and  profited  greatly  from  studying  Luther's  publications  in  finding  his  own  road  to 
refoimation.  But  the  traditional  assessment  that  Calvin  is  best  characterized  as  a 
<faithful  disciple>  of  Luther  who  only  redressed  the  balance  by  emphasizing 
sanctification  as  much  as justification,  does  not  reflect  sufficiently  the  differences 
in religious  motivation,  in piety,  and  ultimately  in formative  impact64. 

3.  Once  Calvin  transferred  the  receiving  of  the  <bridle>  of  God's  holy  will 
from  his  own  individual  experience  to  the  characteristic  of  all  the  elect65,  Calvin-
ism  received  an  activist  direction  which  would  propel  it  onto  the  political  stage  in 
the European  conflict  of  interests, which  was never far  from  Calvin's  mind. 

The  puzzling  question  of  how  the  reformer  who  was  most  insistent  on  leaving 
armed  Intervention  and  retaliation66  to  God,  could  become  the  spiritual  leader  of 
the  most  militant  wing  of  protestantism  in  a  Century  of  conflict  (1550-1650),  can-

acceptation  or imputation)  are to be lifted  up  «ad Dei tribunal, ubi nulla iustitia cense-
tur  nisi  perfecta  absolutaque  Legis  obedientia  ...», Rom.  3,22;  ed.  Parker,  p.  70,  38f. 
This is in keeping with the preceding definition:  «Iustitiam Dei accipio, quae apud Dei 
tribunal  approbetur  ...», Rom.  1,17;  ed.  Parker,  p. 26, 22. In  1551 Calvin  inserted  the 
sentence which best marks both the independence from  Luther and the point where the 
fear of God retains the element of terror present in the medieval timor servilis: «Nam ut 
a  Deo  amemur,  prius  iustos  esse  necesse  est:  quum  iniustitiam  odio  habeat»,  Rom. 
1,17;  ed. Parker, p. 26,  14f.  Calvin uses the terms <active> and <passive> from  the per(cid:173)
spective of human action. See Rom. 5,5; ed. Parker, p. 106, 50-54. 
On the level of theological teaching Calvin locates the assurance of salvation  (certitudo 
conscientiae; fiducia)  squarely on the righteousness of Christ <extra nos>. For the prox-
imity to Luther see Karl-Heinz zur Mühlen, Nos extra nos, Luthers Theologie  zwischen 
Mystik  und  Scholastik,  Tübingen  1972,  (BHTh  46).  Sanctification  is  its  <necessary> 
fruit  and consequence. Yet in the treatise in which this theme is most clearly articulated 
the experience  of  sanctification  is limited  to the elect:  «... non omnes promiscue  hanc 
Spiritus efficaciam  sentire[!], sed  qui  ad  vitam  sunt  ordinati»,  Vera  christianae  pacifi-
cationis et ecclesiae reformandae  ratio (1549), CO 7, 600 A. I surmise that without this 
experience, the conscience must be troubled, since <frustra>  is the claim of adoption  for 
those «in quibus Spiritus regenerationis non habitat», CO 7, 596 C. 
The  iudicia  Dei  cause  fear  (metus),  which  fills  the  heart  of  the  believer  with  <rever-
ence> and <piety>. See comment on Rom. 4,23; ed. Parker, p.  100, 65f.  «Nam generali-
ter <timorem> accipio pro  sensu  pietatis, quem  in nobis generat potentiae, aequitatis et 
clementiae  eius  agnitio», CO  31, 406  C, Ps. 40,4. This  <respect> leads  to  self-control: 
«... reverenter  se contineant  sub eius  imperio, quia agnoscunt  iustum  mundi  iudicem», 
CO 31, 407 A. Accordingly, the very purpose of the Book of Life is said to be that God 
keeps the elect under control: «... sub iugo suae disciplinae eos contineat», CO 31, 412 
C, Ps. 40,9; cf. the characterization of <timor> in CO 31, 201 C, Ps. 19,9. 
In a revealing passage -  which  I take to point to the emotional motivation  or <Sitz im 
Leben> behind Calvin's doctrine  of reprobation -  Calvin  shows how out of  the experi(cid:173)
ence of persecution  and repression emerges the longing for the Day of Reckoning. But 
he  insists: «... non hominis hoc, sed Dei  esse Judicium», CO 31, 217 B, Ps. 21,10.  Cf. 
CO 32, 153 A, Ps. 109,16. 

293 

not  be  answered  fully  in  terms  of  later  Lutheran  influences  or  as  a reaction  to  the 
trauma  of  the  St. Bartholomew  Massacre  of  157267. 

What  at  first  sight  seemed  to  be  a record  of  the  most  intimate  and  private  reli-
gious  experience  of  Calvin  acquired,  through  the  emphasis  on  <docility>  as  battle 
call  and  marching  Orders,  wider  social  and  political  implications.  The  Church  is 
only  a  minority  and  as  such  a resistance  movement.  Yet  this  resistance  movement 
does  not  have  to  wait  <until  Kingdom  comes>68.  What  the  medieval  tradition  had 
placed  at  the  other  side  and  beyond  Judgment  Day  is  for  Calvin  already  unfolding 
in  his  times:  the justice  of  God  protects  and  liberates  his  own69.  Those  who  will-
ingly  have  accepted  the  bridle  of  obedience  can  call  upon  their  unfailing  ally  in 
heaven  progressively  to put  an  end  to  all  tyranny70. 

<Lex  orandi  est  lex  agendi>71:  what  Calvin  taught  to  be  the  legitimate  prayer 
for  the  destruction  of  the  enemies  of  God72  became  the  legitimacy  of  self-defense, 
actual  resistance  and  finally  the  Rule  of  the  Saints73.  Hence  we  may  conclude  that 

67  Both in France and in the Low Countries, organized  resistance and the concomitant re(cid:173)
sistance  theory  emerged  already  in  the  sixties  and  therefore  cannot  be  explained  as a 
reaction  to the St. Bartholomew  Massacre  of  1572. See the nuanced  analysis by M.  E. 
H. N. Mout, Armed Resistance and Calvinism during the Revolt of the Netherlands, in: 
Church, Change, and Revolution, Transactions of the Fourth Anglo-Dutch  Church His-
tory  Colloquium  (Exeter  1988), ed. J. van den  Berg, P. G. Hoftijzer,  Leiden  1991, pp. 
57-68.  See  further  the  important  early  article  of  Robert  M.  Kingdon,  The  Political 
Resistance  of  the  Calvinists  in France  and  the  Low  Countries,  in:  ChH  27,  1958, pp. 
220-233; reprinted in: Robert M. Kingdon, Church and Society in Reformation  Europe, 
London  1985, XI. 

68  The  total  <ruina> of  the  enemies  of  the Gospel  will  not occur before  the  End;  CO 32, 
161 C. But in the meantime they will be held «comme en bride courte»; CO 32, 667 C; 
Sermon  16onPs.  119, 7 May 1553. 

69  C0  31,87B,Ps. 7,18. 
70 

«Deo in cunctis gentibus obedientiam  iure deberi, iusque dominandi perperam  et inius-
te ei eripi  a tyrannis, dum  posthabito  eius  mandato  fas  et nefas  permiscent.  Itaque ro-
gandus  est  ut  mundum  rite  ordinando, imperium  suum  recuperet»,  CO  31, 772 B, Ps. 
82,8. 
It  is  in  keeping  with  Calvin's  indicated  emphasis  on  the  psychological  nature  of  the 
Operation of the Holy Spirit that prayer does not <inform> God but strengthens the sup-
plicant:  «... fidem  nostram  his fulturis  confirmare  utile est», CO  31, 416  C, Ps. 40,17. 
Cf.  «Non pas que Dieu  ait besoin qu'on  le solicite, ny importune, mais c'est  pour  exer-
cer nostre foy,  et pour esprouver tant mieux  si c'est  en luy que nous  cerchons  tout no-
stre bien», CO 32, 571 A/B; Sermon 8 on Ps. 119, 26 February  1553. 
«Nam  ut solide quiescat  fides  nostra, in Deo  simul haec duo consideranda  [CO: censi-
deranda]  sunt:  nempe  immensa  virtus,  qua  ad  totum  mundum  subigendum  instructus 
est:  deinde  paternus  amor,  quem  verbo  suo  patefecit.  Ubi  autem  haec  duo  coniuncta 
sunt,  nihil  obstare  potest  quominus  cunctis  hostibus  insultet  fides  nostra,  neque  enim 
dubium est, velitne opitulari nobis Deus, qui se hoc facturum  promisit», CO 31, 464 B, 
Ps. 46,8. 

73  The most articulate description  of the conditions  of legitimate <revolt> is not presented 
in the Institutio, but in Calvin's letter to Gaspard de Coligny in Paris, dated  16 April (?) 
1561. See letter no. 3374 in CO  18, 425-431; 426 B. 

71 

72 

294 

-  praeter  spem  -  the  militancy  of  later  Calvinism  can  be  retraced  to  the  very  cra-
dle of  the  sudden  conversion  of  Calvin  himself. 

As  far  as  the  psychological  quest  for  Calvin's  personal  make-up  is  concerned 
we  need  neither  shrewdly  unmask  nor  snidely  catch  him:  he  is  forthright  about  his 
experience  of  fear  and  terror74.  Instead  of  repressing  or  eluding  it  -  as  he  did 
before  his  conversion  -  he  made  it  a  central  part  of  his  mission  to  teach  Christian 
Europe  a  new  <reverence>  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  reshaping  existential  Angst  into 
the  <crainte  de  Dieux  The  songs  of  the  Huguenots  testify  to  the  fact  that  this  is  a 
common  and  communal  feature  which  marked,  sustained,  and  mobilized  Calvin(cid:173)
ism  in  its century-long  battle  for  survival. 

Prof. Dr. Heiko A. Oberman,  Division for  Late Medieval  and Reformation  Studies, Univer-
sity of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA 

In  what  must  be  regarded  as  the  first  post-conversion  treatise,  the  Psychopannychia 
(1534),  we  find  another  autobiographical  passage,  which  though  not  explicitly  a con(cid:173)
version  account,  describes  the  experience  of  <point zero>, the  confrontation  with  God 
as ludge: 
«What  do  you  think  went  on  in his  [=Adam]  mind,  yes  indeed  in  every  nerve  of  his 
being  when  he  heard  those  horrible  words  <Adam  where  are  you>  (Gen.  3,9)?  It  is 
easier to think this than to say it; indeed, you cannot even think this through, unless you 
have  experienced  it.  And just  as the  majesty  of  God  in  its  sublime  heights  cannot  be 
expressed  in words, neither can the terrifying  nature of his wrath. Those who are <hit>, 
are  confronted  with  the  weight  of  the  omnipotent  and  they  cannot  escape  him  even 
though they try to flee to the deepest possible abyss. Who would not confess  that this is 
truly death! 
I repeat that those who have once experienced this in their conscience do not need to be 
told. But those who have not had this experience, let  them read  in the Scriptures how 
God  is  a burning  fire  (Deut.  4,24),  who  strikes to death  when  he  speaks  as the ludge. 
This  is the experience behind the  Statement in Exodus 20,19: <Let God not speak  with 
us since this will kill us>. 
Do you want to know  what the death  of the  soul  is? It is to be  without God, to be de-
serted  by  God,  to be  abandoned  to yourself.  Since  God  is  life,  every  person  loses  his 
life who loses the presence  of God. To translate this general  Statement  into graphic de(cid:173)
tail: Since there is no light outside of God who lights our darkness, when he  withdraws 
his  light  then  our  soul  is  certainly  blind  and  buried  in  darkness;  our  soul  is  mute  be-
cause it cannot confess, and call out to embrace God. The soul is dea/because it cannot 
hear his  voice. The  soul  is crippled  since  it does not have a hold  on the God  who has 
promised  that he will <take my right hand  ...> (Ps. 73,23)» (italics mine), ed. Zimmerli 
(as note  11), pp. 67, 5 -  68, 14; cf. CO 5, 204 B-205 A. 
Though  this  passage  has  not  yet  been  drawn  upon,  traditional  Calvin  scholarship  has 
properly pointed to the fact that for the elect God does not spell fear but trust  (fiducia). 
Yet,  the  horrible  story  of  the  reprobate  (decretum  horribile)  is  for  Calvin  not  only  a 
<dogma> but  also a powerful  rhetorical  device to keep the elect on the path  of Mortifi(cid:173)
catio, i.e., aware of the abyss into which the reprobate  is running: «... mirabili Dei vir-
tute  se fuisse  retractum  a profunda  illa  abysso in  quam  se proiiciunt  reprobi», CO 31, 
686 C, Ps. 73,23. 

295 

