What prayers for  the dead in the  Tridentine 

period? 

[Pseudo-]John  of  Damascus,  «De  his  qui  in  fide  dormierunt»  and  its 

«Protestant»  translation  by  Johannes  Oecolampadius 

by  IRENA  BACKUS 

Three  translations  of  the  «De  his  qui  in  fide  dormierunt»  were  produced  in  the 
course  of  the  sixteenth  Century1.  The  first  one,  by  Johannes  Oecolampadius, 
printed  for  the  first  time  in  15202  was  also  the  most  influential.  It  was  reprinted 
not  only  in  the  four  early  «Protestant»  Basel  editions  of  the  «Opera  Damasceni« 
1535,  1539,  1548  and  1559,  but  also  in  the  «Roman  Catholic»  Cologne  edition 
of  Henricus  Grauius  which  dates  from  15463.  Grauius  in  his  preface  [A3v]  jus-
tifies  his  inclusion  of  Oecolampadius'  translation  in  the  following  terms: 

«Eum  sermonem  doctissime  latinum  reddidit  frater  Ioannes  Oecolampadius, 
Birgittani  [!]  ordinis  professor,  per  id  tempus  nondum  haeresi  vlli  reiecto 
cucullo  addictus,  alioqui  talem  sermonem  nunquam  contra  se  ac  suos  versu-
rus». 

In  fact,  Grauius'  Statement  can  be  shown  to  be  somewhat  rash.  One  glance  at 
Oecolampadius'  dedicatory  epistle  to  Conrad  Peutinger  -  an  epistle  which  was 

1 
2 

3 

The mediaeval translation, menüoned  in MPG 95, 246 is no longer extant. 
Quantum  defunctis  prosint  viuentium  bona  opera,  sermo  Ioannis  Damasceni  Iohanne 
Oecolampadio  interprete,  Augsburg  1520.  Cf.  Ernst  Staehelin,  Oekolampad-Biblio-
graphie, 2. Auflage, Nieuwkoop  1963, no. 28 fabbr.:  Oekolampad-BibliographieJ. 
Ioannis  Damasceni  Opera... iam iterum  graecorum  exemplarium  collatione  castigata... 
Basileae, H. Petrus  1539. The contents of the volume are identical to those of the  1535 
Basel edition  also printed by H. Petri:  1) «De fide  orthodoxa»  in the translation  of Le-
fevre  d'Etaples  with Clichtoue's commentary,  2)  «De his qui in fide»  under  the title of 
«Quantum  bona  opera  viuentium»  in  the  translation  of  Oecolampadius,  3)  «Historia 
Iosaphat  et  Barlaam»  in  the  mediaeval  (12th-13th  cent.)  translation  attributed  at  the 
time to George of Trebizond, 4) «Damasceni  vita a Ioanne patriarcha  Hierosolymitano 
Ioanne  Oecolampadio  interprete». The  1548 edition,  compiled  by  Marcus  Hopper  and 
also printed  by  Petri added  several  other  treatises notably  those  translated  by  Ioachim 
Perion  in  1544.  It  also  included  the  Greek  text  alongside  the  Latin  versions  of  «De 
fide»  and  «De his». Although  Hopper  does not  say  so, his Greek  text  is in fact  that of 
the  1531  Verona  edition:  IfiANNOY TOY AAMAEKHNOY EKAOZE ... Ioannis  Damasceni 
editio  Orthodoxae  fidei.  Eiusdem  de  iis  qui  in  fide  dormierunt,  Veronae  1531  (apud 
Stephanum  et fratres  Sabios). The  1559  edition  also  compiled  by  Hopper  and  printed 
by Petri is a slightly expanded  Version of  the  1548 volume. As for  the  1546 edition of 
Henricus  Grauius  -  Opera...  summo  Henrici  Grauii  studio...  Coloniae,  P.  Quentel 
1546-  it  consisted  chiefly  of  mediaeval  Latin  versions  of  Damascene's  works,  the 
notable  exceptions  being  «De  fide»  in  the  translation  of  Lefevre  d'Etaples  «cum 
eiusdem  glossis  [!J»  (in  fact  an  abridgement  of  Clichtoue's  commentary  by  Grauius 
himself)  and  Oecolampadius'  Version  of  «De  his».  Cf.  Irena  Backus,  Traductions 
latines  des  «Oeuvres»  de  lean  Damascene:  editions  de  Cologne  (1546)  et  de  Bäle 
(1548), in: Acta Conventus Neo-Latini Guelpherbitani  1985, ed. S. P. Revard, F. Rädle, 
M. di Cesare, Binghampton N.Y.  1988, 17-25. 

13 

not  reprinted  after  1520  -,  shows  that  the  future  reformer  translated  Pseudo-
Damascene's  sermon  not  in  defence  of  Roman  Catholicism  but  to  serve  as  an 
example  of  moderation4.  He  states  openly:  «sed  vt  impii  hoc  sermone  arguun-
tur,  ita  superstitiosorum  commenta  non  probantur»5.  He  explains,  moreover, 
that  the translation  represents  an answer  to questions  concerning  purgatory  that 
were raised  in a discussion  between Peutinger  and himself,  some  time  ago. The 
discussion  took  place  before  Oecolampadius'  entry  into  the  monastery.  More(cid:173)
over, it is worth noting that  immediately  on entering the Brigittine  monastery at 
Altomünster  in  April  1520,  Oecolampadius  wrote  two  treatises,  «Iudicium  de 
Maitino  Luthero»  and  «Paradoxon»,  which  expressed  open  sympathy  with  Lu-
ther's  views  on  salvation  by faith.  Both were printed  in the following  year6,  and 
both  were attacked  by the Roman Catholic  authorities. 

Thus  the  external  evidence  of  the  circumstances  surrounding  Oecolampa(cid:173)

dius'  translation  of  «De his»,  as  well  as  the  evidence  of  the  epistle  dedicatory, 
would  lead  us to suspect that  the translation  itself  might  understress  rather  than 
overstress  the importance  of prayers  for  the dead. As for  the  Greek  manuscript 
used  by  Oecolampadius,  it  was  sent  to  him  by  Bernhard  Adelmann  also  in 
15207. As we shall  see, the text  differs  substantially  from  that  used  by  the  later 
translators. 

The second  translation  of  «De his»  appeared  in  15328 from  the pen of  count 
Lodovico  Nogarola  ("ih 1559),  translator  of  «Platonicae  Plutarchi  Cheronei 
Quaestiones»  (1559), among other works, and author of the notorious  address to 
the  Council  of  Trent  on  26  December  1546, in  which  he  held  up  St.  Stephen's 
attitude to his adversaries  as a model for  dealing  with  the Protestants.  Nogarola 
was the  sole  layman  to  address  the  Council  of  Trent9.  Although  his  translation 
of  «De his»  appeared  some  years before  the  Council's  first  session,  its  purpose 

Cf.  Ernst Staehelin, Die Väterübersetzungen  Oekolampads,  in: SThZ 33.  1916,  57-91, 
esp. 63  [abbr.:  Staehelin,  Väterübersetzungen].  The article  does not  analyse  Oecolam(cid:173)
padius' translations. It does,  however,  offer  a complete  list of  them  with  some  biblio-
graphical details. It also discusses the criticisms levelled at Oecolampadius' translations 
of Chrysostom  by Germanus Brixius and other humanists. 
Reprinted  in:  Briefe  und  Akten  zum  Leben  Oekolampads...,  bearb.  von  Ernst 
Staehelin, 2 vols., Leipzig  1927-1934, (QFRG  10-11), vol.l, no. 90, p. 132-133. 
Cf.  Oekolampad-Bibliographie  nos. 29, 42. A good  account  of  Oecolampadius'  Posi(cid:173)
tion  during  those  years  is  given  by  Hans  R.  Guggisberg,  Johannes  Oekolampad,  in: 
Gestalten  der  Kirchengeschichte  5:  Die  Reformationszeit  1, Martin  Greschat  (Hrsg.), 
Stuttgart  1981, 117-128. The definitive  biography  remains that of Ernst Staehelin, Das 
theologische  Lebenswerk  Johannes  Oekolampads,  Leipzig  1939  (Nachdruck  1971), 
(QFRG 21). 
Cf. Johannes  Heumann,  Documenta litteraria, Altdorf  1758, 202ff.  On Adelmann  him(cid:173)
self cf.  Geiger, Bernhard  Adelmann  von Adelmannsfelden,  in: ADB  1, Nachdruck  der 
1. Aufl.  1875. Berlin  1967,79. 
Ioannis  Damasceni  libellus  de his  qui  in  fide  dormierunt  ex  graeco  in  latinum  versus 
per Ludouicum  Nogarolam  comitem  Veronensem,  Veronae  1532  (apud  Stephanum  et 
fratres  Sabios, mense martio). There were no other editions of this Version. 
On his life,  works and his  speech  at the Council  see further:  Hubert Jedin,  Geschichte 
des  Konzils  von  Trient,  vol.  2:  Die  erste  Trienter  Tagungsperiode  1545-47,  Freiburg 
i. Br.  1957, 384ff.,  521ff.;  Hubert Jedin,  Un  laico  al  Concilio  di Trento,  il  Conte  Lo(cid:173)
dovico  Nogarola,  in: II Concilio  di Trento  1,  1942/43, 25-33; A.  v.Druffel,  Über  den 
Grafen  Ludovico Nogarola  und das Trientiner Konzil, in: Sitzungs-Berichte  der Bayri(cid:173)
schen Akademie der Wissenschaften,  Phil.-hist. Klasse, München  1875, 426-456. 

4 

6 

8 

14 

was  quite  unequivocally  anti-Lutheran.  In  his  preface,  addressed  to  Clement 
VII, he states  [a2v.]: 

«...  nihil  est  tarnen  quod  te  magis  commouerit  atque  commoueat  quam 
Germaniam  pene totam  olim religiosissimam  et SSR ecclesiae  deditissimam 
Leutheri  [!]  scelere  a  Christi  fide  desciuisse  ac  magna  ex  parte  vicinas  re-
giones  suis erroribus  imbuisse. Quam  dum in veterem  veramque  sententiam 
reducere conaris, quid abs te neglectum, quid praetermissum  dici  potest...» 

Indeed he says  further: 

«... Ioannis Damasceni libellus  super his qui dormierunt  in fide,  nuper aedi(cid:173)
tus  ...  ad  tollendum  Leutheri  [!]  errorem  de  purgatorio  momentiplurimum 
habere videtur. Huius ego lectione cum fuissem  vehementer  oblectatus, eum 
ad  communem  studiosorum  vtilitatem,  qui  graecarum  literarum  rüdes  ac 
ignari sunt, in latinum  volui  transferre...» 

Thus  in  translating  the  treatise  Nogarola  intends  to  produce  a  weapon  of  anti-
Lutheran  controversy. The Greek text  of  «De his»  was  already  available  having 
been  printed  in  the  previous  year10  («nuper  aeditus»)  under  the  patronage  of 
Gian  Matteo  Giberti,  bishop  of  Verona  and  counsellor  to  Clement  VII". 
Needless  to  say  Giberti  is  also  mentioned  by  Nogarola  in  his  preface  [a3r.]  as 
vir «sane et morum  sanctimonia  et  omni  scientiarum  genere  ornatissimus,  [qui] 
innumerabiles  sacrae  paginae  libros  cum  graecos,  tum  etiam  latinos...  imprimi 
curauit...» 

Indeed, as will be shown, Nogarola  follows  the  1531 Greek  text to the  letter 
and only one marginal  remark would  suggest that he was aware of variants. No-
garola's  version  never  approached  the  popularity  of  Oecolampadius  and  was 
never reprinted  after  1532. 

Even less populär was the version  of  «De his» produced  in  September  1586 

by  Giovanni  Briani  of  Modena.  Dedicated  to  the  Tridentine  reformer  of  Bolo(cid:173)
gna,  Cardinal  Gabriele  Paleotti12,  it  apparently  was  never  published  and  is  ex-
tant  in  Briani's  autograph  at  the  Istituto  per  le  scienze  religiöse  in  Bologna  as 
part  of the «fondo  Oppizzani»  of that city's  Archiepiscopal  Library13.  The  man-
uscript  is paginated  1-49  and contains  marginal  glosses  also  in  Briani's  hand14. 
The title-page  is set out to resemble the title-page of a printed book15. As for the 
translator,  Briani, the  sources  are few  and contradictory.  According  to Tirabos-
chi16 he  was the eider  [!]  brother  of  the  historian  Girolamo  Briani  (1581-1646) 

10  Cf.  supra note 3. 
1'  Cf. L. Bopp, Gian Matteo Giberti, in: LThK 4,  1960, 885. 
12  Cf. P.Prodi, Gabriele Paleotti, in: LThK 7, 1962, 1368. 
13  L. Frati, Bibliothecae  Archiepiscopi  Bononiensis  Catalogus,  Bononiae  1856, 404. But 

cf.  infra, note  16 concerning the printed versions of the work. 

14  The MS. is signed on p. 49 «Ego Ioannes Brianus manu propria scripsi,  1586 ». 
15 

IOANNIS  DAMASCENI.  //  HVMILIS  MONACHI  //  ATQUE  PRESBYTERI 
LIBELLVS  DE // HIS QVI IN FIDE  DORMIERVNT  DE // GRAECO  IN  LATINVM 
TRANSLATVS: // PER IOANNEM BRIANVM MVTINENSEM. // 
Decoration  at the bottom: two Cherubs holding a shield. 

16  Cf.  G. Tiraboschi,  Bibliotheca  modenese,  Modena  1781[-1786],  1, 344ff.:  6, 49.  It is 
worth noting that according  to Tiraboschi, Briani's translation  of  «De his» was printed 
in  1580:  Iohannis  Damasceni  de  his  qui  in  Domino  moriuntur,  libellus  e  Graeco  in 
Latinum  versus,  Mutinae,  ap. Antonium  Gadaldinum,  1580  (4°  ). I  have  so  far  been 
unable  to  locate  a  Single  copy  of  the  printed  version.  If  Tiraboschi's  Information  is 

15 

and  a  school-master  at  Sassuolo  from  1588  onwards.  As  well  as  translating  «De 
his»,  he  re-edited  Vincentius'  «Tabulae  continentes  Septem  S.  Ecclesiae  sacra-
menta»17.  According  to  Mazzuchelli18  he  was  also  the  author  of  «Meditazioni 
sopra  il  Pater  noster»  apparently  published  at  Modena  without  any  indication  of 
date. 

Although  Briani  stresses  in  the  heading  above  the  incipit  [p.  7:  Haud  infre-
quenter]  that  the  treatise  has  been  translated  by  him  «nouissime  et  fideliter»,  his 
preface  to  Paleotti  is  no  more  than  a pale  copy  of  Nogarola's  preface  to  Clement 
VII  written  and  published  fifty-four  years  previously.  He  thus  explains  [p.  4] 
that  «De  his» 

«...  est  opusculum  quidem  certe  aureum  et  mirum  in  modum  pollens  ad  e-
uersionem  illius  prauae  disciplinae  Lutheri  ob  quam  totam  pene  Germaniam 
olim  religiosissimam  et  S.R.E.  deditissimam  a  Christi  fide  desciuisse  legi-
tur,  et  cui  tu  in  primis  illustrissime  et  reuerendissime  Cardinalis  et  Archi-
episcope  amplissime  studes.  Huius  ego  lectione,  cum  fuissem  vehementer 
oblectatus  eum  ad  communem  studiosorum  vtilitatem  qui  graecarum  litera-
rum  rüdes  et  ignari  sunt,  in  Romanum  sermonem  traducere  volui  et  vestrae 
amplitudini  potissimum  dicare  in  animum  mihi  induxi». 

The  similarity  of  phrasing  to  Nogarola's  preface  is  too  great  to  be  coincidental. 
Indeed  Briani  admits  on  p.  20  of  his  text  that  he  simply  copied  out  Nogarola's 
metric  translation  of  the  versified  section  of  «De  his»19  (he  was  either  not  aware 
of  or  deliberately  disregarded  the  translation  of  Damascene's  works  by  Jacques 
de  Billy  which  had  appeared  in  Paris  in  157720).  The  second  part  of  Briani's 
preface  to  Paleotti  confirms  his  total  dependence  on  Nogarola,  as  he  simply 
copies  out  the  doubts  expressed  by  his  predecessor  (a2v.-a3r.)  about  the  authen-
ticity  of  «De  his».  These  doubts  are  expressed  in  a  very  veiled  fashion.  Nogaro(cid:173)
la  and  Briani  after  him  specify: 

«Quamuis  nolim  quempiam  suspicari  hoc  ipsum  non  vere  fuisse  Damasceno 
ascriptum,  iccirco  quod  Machabaeorum  historiae  plurimum  innitatur,  quam 
in  volumine  quarto  De  fide  orthodoxa  quod  legitimum  esse  Damasceni  om-
nes  censent,  in  sacrorum  librorum  numero  non  reponit.  Nam  si  quis  vtrun-
que  studiose  et  sedulo  pertractabit,  videbit  certe  simili  oratione  ac  stilo 
vtrumque  esse  atque  ad  magni  Dionysii  elocutionem  cuius  etiam  grauissi-
mum  testimonium  plerumque  adducit,  proxime  accedere». 

It  is  difficult  to  see  whether  the  argument  against  the  authenticity  of  the  work 
came  from  Nogarola  himself  or  whether  he  is  merely  replying  to  an  argument 

correct,  however,  the  1586 MS. would  represent  a revision  of  the printed Version. See 
also  the  article:  G. de  Caro, Briani,  Girolamo,  in: Diz. Biogr.  d.  Italiani, Roma  1972, 
14,211-213. 
Nouem  illae tabulae  continentes  Septem  S. ecclesiae  sacramenta,  nee  non  irregularita-
tes, suspensiones  ..., olim a R. P. Fr. Vincentio de Quintiano o. p. editae, Mutinae 1588. 

18  Cf.  G. M. Mazzuchelli, Gli Scrittori d'Italia, 11:4, Brescia  1763, 2082ss. 
19 

«In  vertendis  carminibus  sequentibus  quia  optume  [!J  et prudentissime  versa  fuisse  a 
Ludouico  Nogarola  inuenimus,  ideo  doetam  et  dilueidam  illius  versionem  ponendam 
esse  duximus».  Indeed,  the  translation  of  the  verses  is  that  of  Nogarola  with  no 
changes or emendations (= a8r.-blv.  in the  1531 edition). 
«De  his  qui  in  fide»  was  translated  anew  by  de  Billy.  Cf.  A Posseuinus,  Apparatus 
sacer, Coloniae  1603, 863-864. On the  1577 edition  in general  cf.  Irena  Backus,  Jean 
Damascene, «Dialogus contra Manichaeos», in: REAug 38, 1992, 155-167. 

16 

advanced  by  someone  eise.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  both  Jacques  de  Billy 
and  Posseuinus  in  his  «Apparatus  sacer»  of  1603  do  not  in  any  way  question 
John of Damascus' authorship of «De his»21. 

Our  object  in  examining  the  translations  of  Oecolampadius,  Nogarola  and 

Briani  is twofold.  Firstly  we  shall  compare  the  Greek  text  used by  Oecolampa(cid:173)
dius  with  that  used  by  the  two  Italians.  Secondly,  we  shall  attempt  to  estimate 
the «doctrinal  slant» given to the original by its various translators. 

Greek text 

Nothing  is known  of  the  Greek  manuscript  that  Adelmann  sent  to  Oecolampa(cid:173)
dius.  All  that  we  can  say  with  any  confidence  is  that  it  differed  substantially 
from  the  Greek  text  that  was  published  in  Verona  in  1531  and  that  served  as 
basis for  both Nogarola's  and Briani's translations. The Verona  volume  contain-
ed  also the Greek  text  of  «De fide  orthodoxa»  and  it  is  ironic  that  the  «Protes(cid:173)
tant» editor  Marcus Hopper  of  Basel  in  1548 used  both the texts  of  that  edition 
which  he printed  alongside  Lefevre's  Version  of  «De  fide»  and  Oecolampadius' 
version  of  «De his»  22.  Hopper  certainly  does  not  admit  openly  to  having  done 
this, saying  simply  in his preface  [2v.]: 

«Accesserunt  adeo  nunc  priori  editioni  graeca  quae  vides  hie  omnia.  Sunt 
autem  ea  EK&KTU;  TTJ<; op8o86!;o'u  möTeon;... Sermo  denique  7tepi  xcöv  EV JÜÖTEI 
KEKmuT(j£va>v... Reliqua  si graece extant, nobis hercle in conspectum  hactenus 
non venerunt». 

Hopper's discretion  about the sources of his Greek text  is hardly  surprising  giv(cid:173)
en  the  aims  of  the  1531  Verona  edition  as  stated  by  «Donatus  Veronensis»  in 
the  preface  to  Clement VII.  There,  after  a  general  panegyric  of  Greek  as  the 
language  of the first  Christians, Donatus  speeifies  that the Greek text  of the two 
treatises  was  furnished  by  Gian  Matteo  Giberti,  Bishop  of  Verona  [i2v.].  The 
latter's intentions  are then made quite piain  [i3r.] 

«Gibertus  sibi  etiam  atque  etiam  consyderandum  duxit  nulli  aptius  opus 
«De  orthodoxa  fide»  dicari  potuisse  quam  tibi:  cui  non  solum  aduersus 
barbaras  nationes  quae  hoc  tempore  armis  illam  nunquam  oppugnare 
desistunt,  semper  autem  conantur  euertere,  sed  etiam  aduersus  nouos 
desertores  veritatis  qui  Luteriani  vocantur,  certamen  assiduum  est...  Hunc 
igitur  Damascenum  habebis  quasi  telum  acutissimum,  quo  si  non  priores 
illos, saltem hos posteriores hostes  confodias». 

It must be stressed that the Verona text cannot be  said to differ  doctrinally  from 
that  used  by  Oecolampadius  eleven  years  previously.  On the  other  hand,  as  we 
shall  see,  differences  of  reading  do,  on  occasions,  give  rise  to  interpretations 
with  a particular  doctrinal  slant.  We  shall  here  examine  some  of  the  more  im-
portant textual  differences. 

Cf. Posseuinus, ibid. 
Cf. supra, note 3. 

17 

Oetei  ydp  oürox;  ö  ipiXavepoMKx;  Küpio;  For  thus  the  kind  Lord  wants  to  be 
a'iTEics6ai, Kai VEHEIV Td TCÖV i8i(Bv KTiondTtov  asked,  and  He  wants 
to  distribute 
Tcpog ccorripiav  avcoüuEva,  Kai  TÖTE  (JXXMÖV  those  things  which  are  sought  for  the 
[**1531: aiitöii;] ÖXIKÄI; EJnKd|X7[TETav oüx  salvation  of  His  own  creatures,  and 
ÖTavTu; *u.övovÜ7jö* [**1531: TOtEp] iSiai;  He  is  inclined  fto  them]  all  the  more, 
VUyCnS  äyemC,rpa\  &XX' ö-mv  [add.  Kai  not  when  someone  is  concemed  only 
1531]  uicfep TOÜ TCEXOQ TOÜTO Epyd^TfTai.'Ev- 
for  his  own  soul  but  when  he  [also] 
TEÜSEV yäp ETri. TO ßEouiurrcov EKrujtoürai, Kai  does  something  for  his  neighbour.  For 
tdi;  ETEpcov  SrapEäg,  rix;  oiKEiaq  e|aiTEi 
thus  he  becomes  an  imitator  of  God 
XäpvuaQ  Kai  TfJ5  TEXEIOJ;  dyäTtT}; TOV bpov  and  demands  the  gratification  of  oth-
EUTrepiKteiEi Kai TÖV naKapionöv  EK TOÜ*TOU ers  as  his  own  grace,  and  he  reaches 
jropi^ETai,  Kai  TT|V i8idv  crov*  [**om.  ultimate  charity  and  attains  happiness 
from  that  *in  doing  good  to  his  neigh-
1531]  TJi(v)  TOÜ TCEXO^ Ei)EpYeTEi(v)  vuxr|v 
ÖTt  udXiora  [add.  1531: Koui^ETai].23 
bour's  soul,  he  benefits  at  the  same 
time  his  own  soul  as  greatly  as  possi-
ble* 
to  his 
neighbour's  soul  he  attains  the  utmost 
happiness.24 

in  doing  good 

/or  ** 

Oecolampadius'  text  very  likely  maintained  the  udXXov  in  Kai  TÖTE uäÄAov öXucüx; 
whereas  the  Verona  text  in  its  1531  Version  and  as  reprinted  by  Hopper  (=  SH) 
substituted  amöis  for  uäXXov.  Moreover,  Oecolampadius  maintains  uövov  in TU; 
uövov tmo iSioa; yxrxfiq  and  «adds»  Kai  in  äXk' ÖTav Kai VOTEP TOÜ TCEXXXI;. The  text  of  SH 
reads  tu; •oTtep25 iSioa; \|A)xf|?--- äXX  mav  Kai urcEp TOÜ rteXai;.  An  even  more  important 
textual  divergence  occurs  in  the  final  sentence  with  SH  reading  Kai uaKaptouöv EK 
TOÜ  TT|V  TOÜ  TCEXC«;  EÜepyETeiv  \>mxr\v  ÖTI  udXioTa  Koui^ETai.  Oecolampadius'  text,  it 
would  appear,  reads  Kai TÖV uaKapiauöv...  uäXicra as  in  MPG. 

The  resulting  translations  diverge  correspondingly,  although  it  must  be  not-
ed  that  Oecolampadius'  style  here  makes  it  particularly  difficult  to  reconstruct 
his  Greek  text  with  any  precision. 
Oecolampadius  4192 6.  Est  enim  et  haec  voluntas  benignissimi  Domini  vt  crea-
turae  quae  ad  salutem  petuntur,  sie  petantur  et  distribuantur,  et  exoratur  non 
solum  quando  quis  pro  salute  propria  est  anxius,  sed  et  quando  pro  proximo 
aliquid  operatur.  Haec  enim  foelix  diuinae  bonitatis  imitatio  est,  dum  quis 
aliis  non  minus  quam  sibi  gratiam  exposcit  et  tunc  consumatae  charitatis 
terminus  ac  beatitudo  attingitur  dum  in proximo  animae  suae  benefacit. 

Nogarola  a73.  Vult  enim  Clemens  Dominus  sie  seipsum  ab  hominibus  postulari 
et  quaeeunque  ad  suarum  creaturarum  salutem  petuntur  tribuere:  quibus 
tunc  prorsus  flectitur  ac  inclinatur  cum  quis  gratia  proximi,  non  pro  sua  ip-
sius  anima  sollicitus  est.  Nam  ex  hoc  similis  Deo  efficitur  qui  aliorum  mu-
nera  quasi  in  suam  expetit  gratiam.  Atque  cum  erga  animam  proximi 
sui 
beneficus  extiterit  perfeetae  charitatis  terminum  complectitur  ac  quam  ma-
xime  beatitudinem 

acquirit. 

MPG 95, 253; Verona  1531, 143v.-144. 
The literal English  translation  is for  use  of  readers  less  familiär  with  Greek.  It  should 
not be considered  as the definitive  rendering! 
' YiEp remains a possible reading also in Oecolampadius's text. 
The pagination is that of the  1548 edition (Basel, Hopper, Petri. Cf.  supra note 3). 

23 

24 

25 
26 

18 

Briani  17. Nam  voluntas  Domini  est  sie  se  ab  hominibus  postulari  et  euneta  tri-
buere  quae  ipsemet  ad  salutem  suarum  creaturarum  petitur  [!],  quibus 
tunc 
maxime  flectitur  atque  inclinatur,  cum  aliquis  sui  proximi  gratia,  non  sui 
ipsius  anima  anxius  est.  Propter  hoc  enim  ille  similis  Deo  efficitur  qui 
aliorum  munera  vt  in  suam  gratiam  expetit;  atque  cum  de  anima  proximi 
sui 
terminum  charitatis  perfeetae  complectitur  et  beatitu-
extiterit, 
benemeritus 
dinem  quam  maxime 
acquirit. 

to  avvSvz,.  Whatever  his 

Because  of  Oecolampadius'  Condensed  style  it  is difficult  to  say  whether  his  text 
did  in  fact  read  uäMov,  but  there  is  certainly  nothing  in  his  translation  that  cor-
responds  to onixöu;. Nogarola's  and  Briani's  versions  on  the  other  hand,  both  have 
quibus  which  could  only  correspond 
text,  Oeco-
lampadius's  translation  of  this  sentence  is  grammatically  poor  and  his  Latin  is 
difficult  to  construe27.  There  is,  however,  no  doubt  that  his  Greek  text  read  ob% 
bxav  xit;  uövov  and  he  is  the  only  one  of  the  three  translators  with  non 
solum 
quando.  As  for  the  last  sentence,  Oecolampadius's  version  is  again  too  Condens(cid:173)
ed  to  serve  as  an  adequate  guide  to  his  Greek  text.  It  does,  nonetheless,  provide 
some  clues.  Nothing  in  the  reformer's  Latin  corresponds  to  KOUI£EX<XI  whereas 
Nogarola  and  Briani  State  clearly:  beatitudinem 
...  acquirit.  Moreover,  Oeco(cid:173)
lampadius'  is  the  only  version  to  render  explicit  the  idea  that  it  is  the  bene-
factor's  soul  that  profits  from  good  deeds  on  behalf  of  others.  The  exaet  phras-
ing:  dum  in proximo  animae  suae  benefacit  points  to  a reading  with  xf|v I5UXV,  but 
not  necessarily  to  a reading  with cruv. 

Our  second  passage  shows  clearly  that  there  was  a  variant  in  Oecolampa(cid:173)
dius'  Greek,  but  here  the  question  is  complicated  by  his  manipulation  of  the  text 
so  as  to  alter  the  doctrine  of  John  of  Damascus. 
Kai.  ydp u£xd xo qxxvai. xbv üjKxpfrrr|v  xaüxa,  For  after  the  prophet  said  this  [i.e. 
YeyovE  TKXVTCÖ;  EV  xrä  ä5T|  eZfUioXbyv/cng  who  will  confess  thee  in  the  depths? 
EKEIVCOV  Aeyco  xäv  *EKei  Tuoxeixsävxcov*  Ps.  6,6] 
there  was  nonetheless  con-
[**om.  1531]  ev xfj acoxrpu» TOÜ AEOTIÖXO*)  fession  in  Hell  of  those  I  say  [who 
KOOÖSÜ).  Oü  ydp  äTÖJix;  EOCOOE  TOXVXO«;  Ö  believed  even  there]  in  the  Lord's  sa-
£<Bo8öxn£,  äXk  aq  Etprpm,  micei  xaix;  lutary  descent.  For  the  giver  of 
moxEiJaavxag28 

life 
indiscriminately 

saved  not  everyone 
but,  as  has  been  said,  those  who  be(cid:173)
lieved  even  in  that  place. 

The  Greek  text  of  SH  omits  EKE~I maxEixTdvxajv,  which  is  retained  by  the  reformer's 
manuscript.  Our  three  translators  render  the  passage  as  follows: 
Oecolampadius  421.  Quamuis  autem  ita  dicat  propheta,  omnino  tarnen  in  in-
ferno  confessio  aliqua  fuit,  eorum  inquam  qui  in  salutarem  Domini  descen-
sum  crediderant.  Christus  enim  assertor  vitae  non  simpliciter  omnes,  sed 
eos  tantum  qui  crediderant,  vt  dictum  est,  saluauit. 

Nogarola  a7v.-a8r.  Nam  postea  quam  verba  illa  protulit  sacer  propheta,  nonnul-
los  quidem  apud  inferos  Dominus  confitentes  audiuit,  eos  vtique  pro  quo-
rum  salute  descenderat.  Haud  enim  Deus  [a8r]  vitae  largitor  omnes  genera-
tim  saluos  fecit,  sed  eos,  vt  diximus,  qui  etiam  illo  in  loco  credebant. 

27 

For contemporary  criticism of his translations  of Chrysostom, cf.  Staehelin,  Väterüber(cid:173)
setzungen 69  ff. 

144v. 

19 

Briani  20.  Posteaquam  huiusmodi  verba  pronunciauit  sacer  propheta,  quosdam 
in  inferno  confitentes  Dominum  exaudisse  et  eos  medius  fidius,  quibus  vt 
salutem  daret,  e  coelo  descenderat.  Deus  nanque  vitae  largitor  non  omnes 
generaliter  saluos fecit  sed (vt dictum est) eos qui illic quoque  credebant... 

It  is possible  that  the  Adelmann  MS. contained  a variant  without  KÖIKEI in KÖKEI 
TOVK;  TuaTEixsavra;.  This,  however,  seems  extremely  unlikely.  Judging  by  his 
sentence  [eorum  inquam  qui  in  salutarem  Domini  descensum  crediderant»,  his 
Greek  almost  certainly  contained  the  variant  EKEI mcTEixTävTaiv.  Yet  Oecolam-
padius  does  not  translate  EKEI and  thus  alters  substantially  the  thought  of  the 
original.  According  to  him  it  is  those  who  believed  in  the  Lord's  descent  who 
confessed,  and  not  those who believed  in  it  in  spite  of being  in Hell.  Oecolam-
padius  thus  places  a  much  more  overt  stress  on  salvation  by  faith.  The  text 
without  EKEI m.axE'uaävTcov in  SH  conveys  a  different  idea:  those  who  confessed 
were the very  ones for  whose  salvation  the  Lord  descended  into  Hell.  The  link 
here  is  between  good  works  (exemplified  by  confession)  and  the  salutary  de(cid:173)
scent  into  Hell.  Briani  supplies  e  coelo  -  either  deliberately  or due  to  the  mis-
understanding  of the passage -  and thus places an even greater emphasis on sal(cid:173)
vation  by works. According  to his version, only those confessed  for  whose  sake 
the  Lord  was  incarnated.  Both  Nogarola  and  Briani  translate  KWKEI TOW; mo-
TEÜaavroa; correctly  placing  emphasis  on  KOCKEI SO  that  it  ist  the  importance  of 
faith  in that place which is brought out. 

Oecolampadius omits KAKEI and thus Stresses, in harmony  with his  preceding 

sentence, that the Lord came to save those who believed. 

This passage provides an interesting  instance not only of  the difference  bet(cid:173)

ween the text used  by Oecolampadius  and that used by the other translators, but 
also of  the  way  in  which  Oecolampadius  tampers  with  his text  so as  to  empha-
sise salvation by  faith. 

Good  works 

We  have  seen  already  that  Oecolampadius  on  occasions  makes  free  with  the 
Greek text  in order to slant the thought of  the original  in  favour  of  salvation  by 
faith.  Several other passages containing  (so far  as can be ascertained)  no textual 
variants  show  that  a  pronounced  doctrinal  slant  is  given  to  «De  his»  by  Oeco(cid:173)
lampadius  and  by  Nogarola  and  Briani.  We  shall  here  examine  some  of  the 
most important  instances. 

20 

rp  etotiSi  veKpoibnEvoci  xf|  hope, 

EK<[»IÄX>V  Kai  and  absurd  opinion  contrary 

' O  nepi rcxvKx TOIVUV TOI KOA<X Kai  0ecxpiA.fi  The  snake  twisting  round  all  good  and 
7tpäynorax  Kai  5iavof|jixxTa  KOIXXXIVÖUEVCX;  Godloving  practices  and  thoughts,  the 
cxpici Kai aipaTTOUEvcx; raxXanvdia; kyfipoq, rfj  hated  murderer,  stricken  by  brotherly 
love,  disturbed  by  faith,  mortified  by 
|i£v  cpiXaSeXtpia  nXv(vm\izvo^  xr\  8e  nicrrei 
PHYvuixEvog 
the 
<Tuu;Hx6Eia Kpa8aivöu£voci  eve<TKr|\|fE  xicw  ö  wicked  one  inspires  in  some  a  new 
Jtapävoutx;  <TKf|V|/iv  uva 
to  all 
dXAoxpiov,  Kai  TÖ>V iepräv  BEOUIBV  E15 ämxv  sacred 
that  no  good 
dvriOeTOv cbg cm xd  HExd 6dvaxov raxvta xd  works  serve  the  deceased  once  they 
OeocpiWi  epya 
övivrrcn.v29. 
Oecolampadius  146.  Igitur  semper  ille  cuius  Studium  est  bona  Deoque  accepta 
opera  vitiare,  iugulare  hostilesque  dolos  struere,  qui  et  fraterna  charitate 
percellitur,  fide  disrumpitur,  compassione  rotatur,  vt  est  praeuaricator 
legum,  nonnullis  inspirat  figmentum  adulterinum,  alienum  sacrisque 
constitutionibus  omnino  aduersum:  nempe  bona  grataque  Deo  opera 
omnia  defunctis  nihil  prodesse. 

cro8e  vmc,  npcAxxßovTc»;  are  dead. 

shaken  by  compassion, 

laws:  namely 

Nogarola  a4v.  Ille  igitur  iniquus  serpens  ac  humani  generis  hostis  perpetuus 
circa  omnes  honestas  Deoque  gratas  actiones  cogitationesque  sese  im-
plicans  cuius  iugulum  gladio  petiit  Christus,  quem  charitas  debilitat, 
vincit  fides  et  misericordia  vexat,  peruersionem  quandam  cum  inusita-
tam  et  immanem,  tum  etiam  sacris  omnino  legibus  contrariam  nonnullis 
induit:  quaecunque 
nullatenus 
adiumento 

scilicet  vita  functis  pia  exhibentur  opera, 

esse. 

Briani  9.  Serpens  ergo  ille  iniquus  et  humanae  generationis  perennis  inimicus 
circa  cunctas  honestas  et  Deo  gratas  actiones  se  implicans,  cuius  iugu(cid:173)
lum  Christus  gladio  petiit,  qui  a  charitate  frangitur,  a  fide  vincitur  et  a 
misericordia  vexatur,  persuasionem  quandam  tum  insuetam  et  immanem 
tum  etiam  nonnullis  legibus  sacris  contrariam  induit:  cuncta 
videlicet 
opera  quae  pia  exhibentur  pro  iis  qui  ab  hac  iam  migrarunt  vita, 
inania 
et  infructuosa  Ulis  esse. 

In  spite  of  its  somewhat  telegraphic  style,  Oecolampadius'  translation  is  much 
better  than  the  other  two.  He  distinguishes  between  vöua;  and  ÖEOUO«;  (unwritten 
law)  translating  the  former  by  lex 
legum)  and  the  latter  by 
constitutio.  Furthermore,  Oecolampadius  is  the  only  one  to  translate  otpaTxouEva; 
correctly  as  an  active  participle  referring  to  the  serpent  without  having  recourse 
to 
the  elaborate  paraphrase  of  Nogarola  which  Briani  copies  verbatim. 
Oecolampadius  is  also  quite  clear  as  to  the  role  of  uoiv  in  the  sentence:  it  ap-
plies  to  the  devil's  victims.  Ticnv is  also  thus  understood  by  Nogarola  but  com-
pletely  misunderstood  by  Briani  who  applies  it to 

(in  praeuaricator 

legibus. 

However,  Oecolampadius'  translation  of rix; im  xd u£td  Savatov...  övivrKJiv does 
not  correspond  to  his  original.  [Pseudo-]John  of  Damascus  makes  it  quite  clear 
that  it  is  the  pious  works  performed  on  behalf  of  the  dead  which  are  of  no  avail 
and  this  is  brought  out  by  both  Nogarola's  and  Briani's  translations.  Oeco(cid:173)
lampadius  affirms  that  no  good  works  are  of  any  avail  to  the  dead.  He  thus 
denies  that  works  performed  on  behalf  of  the  dead  should  be  accorded  a  particu-

29  MPG 95, 248, 249, Verona  1531, 141v. 

21 

lar  Status.  They  are  implicitly  classed  with  all  good  works  so  that  the  signifi-
cance  of  purgatory  is  reduced. 

Grace 

andfaith 

in 

things 

More  importantly,  the  future  reformer  makes  a  consistent  effort  to  emphasise 
that  divine  grace  and  faith  take  precedence  over  good  works.  In  the  two  pas-
sages  that  follow  he  does  not  even  have  to  resort  to  alterations  of  text  to 
emphasise  the  preeminent  importance  of  grace  and  faith. 
"Bpr| xoiyapoüv  ö  imXix,  xä  Osia  Kai  ßaBix;  And  so the  profound  Dionysius  versed 
Aiovixnxx;  EV  vf\  7tepi  twv  KEKOIIXTJJEVCOV 
clearly... 
divine 
uixmicfi  OKopia oircaxri 'Xifyng Ai xä>v äyicov  «prayers  of 
the  saints  are  efficient 
npooEuxai,  Kai  Ka-rd TOV xfiSe  ßiov,  (if|Ttye  also  in  this  life,  not  only  after  death, 
(i£xd  öäva-rov, EI; TOW; d^iau;  iepööv  EUX<ÖV,  for  those  worthy  of  holy  prayers,  that 
ffyouv  Eiq TOVX; mavmq  evEfryoücn.  Tö  8E,  is  the  faithful».  And  by  the  words  not 
HTVUYE, raxvrax; evraüöa  uri&v EXEpov f|  TO,  only  nothing  other  should  be  under-
Ttoocp yE uäXXov, 
Oecolampadius  417/418.  Quocirca  profundus 

in  diuinis 
Dionysius...  inquit  sanctorum  preces  etiam  in  ista  vita  et  non  tantum  post 
mortem  prodesse  iis  solis  qui  digni  sunt  vt  pro  eis  sanctae  preces 
fiant, 
nempe  fidelibus.  Vbi  per  id  quod  ait:  non  tantum  post  mortem,  nihil  aliud 
intelligendum  quam:  [418]  quanto  magis  post  mortem? 

stood  than  all  the  more. 

ille  et  exercitatus 

ratoArpiTEov30. 

says 

Nogarola  a5r./v.  Itaque  magnus  Dionysius...  sie  scriptum  reliquit  sanctorum 
patrum  precationes  iis  conduce-[a5v.]  re  qui  in  vita  adhuc  manent, 
nedum 
Ulis  qui  iam  excesserint,  modo  ii pro  quibus  adhibentur,  digni,  hoc  est  fide-
les,  sint;  quo  in  loco  verbum  illud  nedum  omnino  par  est  atque  idem  valet 
quod:  quanto  magis. 

Briani  11/12.  Quocirca  Magnus  Dionysius...  talia  verba  monumentis  prodidit. 
illis  qui  adhuc  etiam  anima 
Praeces  sanctorum  patrum  sunt  fruetuosae 
fruuntur  nedum  postea  qui  animam  amiserunt  dummodo  digni, 
id  est 
fideles,  sint  illi  pro  quibus  offeruntur.  Quo  in  loco  dictio  nedum  par  atque 
idem  quod  quo  magis  sonat  et  valet. 

or  indeed  UETÖ  Oavarav  as  qui 

Oecolampadius'  translation,  with  the  notable  exception  of  the  word  solis,  fol-
lows  the  original  much  more  closely  than  the  Nogarola  and  Briani  versions.  The 
reformer  makes  no  attempt  to  expand  räv  ayioov into  sanctorum  patrum.  Nor  does 
he  paraphrase  KOTÖ TOV TT|5E ßiov  as  in  vita  adhuc  manent  I  adhuc  etiam  anima 
fruuntur 
animam 
amiserunt.  However,  his  rendering  of  Eiq  by  solis  alters  the  entire  emphasis  of 
the  original.  [Pseudo-]Damascene  is  using  the  Hier.  eccl. 
to  emphasise  the 
necessity  of  offering  prayers  for  the  living  and  for  the  dead  since  those  prayers 
are  efficacious  so  long  as  they  are  offered  for  the  faithful.  In  other  words  it  is 
the  action  of  offering  prayers  that  is  essential.  The  prayers  will  necessarily  have 
the  correct  effect.  And  this  is  indeed  the  sense  conveyed  by  Nogarola's  and 
Briani's  translations.  Yet  Oecolampadius  asserts  that  regardless  of  whether  they 
are  offered  for  the  living  or  for  the  dead,  prayers  will  only  work  for  the  faithful. 

iam  excesserint 

I  qui 

iam 

30  MPG 95, 249, Verona  1531, 142r.-v. 

22 

Priority  is thus  given to faith.  If the subject  is faithfui,  any  prayer  on his  behalf 
will work. 

Oecolampadius,  as  we  have  seen,  has  no  hesitations  on  occasions  about 
tampering  with his original. He does  so much  more  blatantly  than  in  any  of  the 
passages  already  discussed  when  translating  the  section  in  which  [Pseudo-]Da-
mascenus  cites  [Dionysius] on prayer. 
«Aib TO15 änkpoiq, fiyouv -nüg  ÖMpomorot^ ow  «And  for  this  reason  he  does  in  no 
E7CEi)XEim -corina KEKOIUT|U£VOI£» Kai atiOu;-  way  pray  thus  for  the  profane  or  the 
«OUKOÜV  ö  8EUX;  iEpdpxrß  e^atTei-uat  -cd  unbaptised  deceased.»  And  again 
piAa6£<B,Kav Jtdvra<;5a)pr^rp6n£8a»31. 
[Dionysius  says]:  «therefore  the  holy 
high  priest  prays  for  things  which  are 
pleasing  to  God  and  which  He  will 
generally  grant.» 

Oecolampadius  418. Et  ideo  pro prophanis  et  baptismate  non  illustratis,  si  de-
functi  fuerint,  preces  eas  non  facit.  Et  iterum:  sanctus  itaque  antistes  petit 
quae  diuinitus  promissa  sunt  et  quae  grata  Deo  et  quae  omnino  daturum 
credit. 

Nogarola  a5v.  Quapropter  istaec  profanis,  hoc  est  luce  carentibus,  post  dormi-
tionem  minime  precatur.  Rursus:  postulat  igitur  sacer  antistes  quae  Deo 
grata sunt et penitus  concedenda. 

Briani  12.  Prophanis  autem,  hoc  est  luce  carentibus,  post  dormitionem  huius-
modi res non praecatur.  Flagitat  quoque  sacer praesul  quae Deo  ingrata  non 
sunt et quae prorsus concedenda  sunt. 

We  might  note  that  in  translating  dqximarou; by  baptismate  non  illustratis,  Oe(cid:173)
colampadius  shows  a much  greater  awareness  of  patristic  theological  terminol-
ogy  than  either  Nogarola  or  Briani,  who  translate  literally: 
luce  carentibus. 
However,  Oecolampadius  also  departs  from  his  original  by  his  insertion  of  di(cid:173)
uinitus promissa  sunt.  If  we are to  discount  the  remote  possibility  of  the  Adel(cid:173)
mann  MS.  containing  this  variant,  Oecolampadius  can  be  said  to  be  making  a 
deliberate  effort  to  harmonise  [Pseudo-]Damascenus'  and  [Pseudo-]Dionysius' 
doctrine  of  prayer  with  that  put  forward  by  Luther.  We  might  note  that  Luther 
in  his  «Sermon  von  dem  Gebet»,  published  in  1519,  defined  prayer  in  the 
following  terms:  «Zum  1.  Das  eyn  gepeet  recht  gut  sey  und  erhoeret  werde, 
seynd zwey ding von  noeten, das erste, Das man von gott eyne vorheyssung  od-
der  zu  sage  habe  und  die  selbe  zuvor  bedencke  etc.»32.  It  is  this  very  doctrine 
that  is imported  by Oecolampadius  into his translation  of «De his». 

Conclusion 

We  have  alredy  had  occasion  to  note  the  Condensed  style  of  Oecolampadius' 
translation  and,  independently  of  that, the close relationship  that  exists  between 
Nogarola's  and Briani's versions. 

Nogarola's  translation  (more  elegant  than  that  of  Oecolampadius)  does 
nothing  to  bring  out  the  nuances  of  [Pseudo-]Damascene's  theological  vocabu-

31  MPG  95,  252,  Verona  1531,  142v. 
32  WA  2,  175. 

23 

lary. Moreover,  it occasionally  forces  the meaning  of the original  so as to  bring 
out the special Status of prayers for the dead  and their connexion  with  salvation. 
Briani's  translation  is no more than  a pale  copy  of  Nogarola's.  Only  occasional 
stylistic  flourishes  and  specifications  of-things  left  implicit  by  the  «Veronese 
count» are added. 

All  in all, it seems  as if the translation  of  «De his»  that  exercised  the  great-
est influence  during  much  of the  16th Century  was also the most  «Protestant» in 
tone. Oecolampadius  refuses  to rank  prayers  for  the dead  in a  special  category, 
apart  from  all  the  other  good  works  and  thus  understresses  the  importance  of 
purgatory.  Moreover,  by  manipulating  the Greek  text,  and  by  frankly  imposing 
a  Lutheran  doctrine  on  [Pseudo-]Damascene,  he  accords  a  much  greater 
importance  than  his  original  to  grace  and  salvation  by  faith.  Stylistically  his 
version  tends  to  over-compression,  yet,  in  spite  of  this,  he  shows  a  good 
knowledge  of Greek grammar and theological  terminology. 

Prof. Dr. Irena Backus, Universite de Geneve, Institut d'Histoire  de la Reformation,  1211 
Geneve 4 

24 

