Confessional  Continuity  in the  Reformed 

Family of  Churches 

von  ALASDAIR I.  C.  HERON 

Almost  seventy  years  ago,  in  1923,  the  still  relatively  young  and  (outside  the 
German and Swiss context) almost totally unknown Karl Barth, who had recently 
been called to the professorship  of reformed  theology  in Göttingen, addressed  the 
General  Assembly  of  the  Reformed  Alliance  in  Germany  on  the  theme, 
«Reformed  Doctrine,  its  Nature  and  Task»1.  That  lecture  is  still  today  well  re-
membered,  at least in Germany. Barth began by launching  a frontal  attack  on the 
idea  that  the  true  and  valuable  fruits  of  the  reformed  tradition  in  the  twentieth 
Century were not to be sought  in theological  disputation, but in exploration  of the 
tradition's  non-theological,  purely  religious  and  cultural  significance  for  the pre-
sent  day. The words  in which  this  idea  was  expressed  were taken by him  from  a 
report  on  the  meeting  of  the Eastern  Section  of  the  World  Reformed  Alliance  in 
Zürich  earlier that year: «It could not escape  any wakeful  observer that  unfruitful 
theological  debates played only a minimal role in these days. The meeting was in-
formed  by a strong spiritual drive to grasp the ancient truths of the Reformation  as 
untheologically  as possible in their religious  significance  for the present, to allow 
them  to  come  alive  again...  and  to  test  out  these  venerable  truths  in  practice  in 
changed  circumstances»2.  The  reporter  clearly  had  a  certain  conception  of  the 
kind  of  «continuity»  necessary  in  the  reformed  church  -  but  one  which  Barth 
could by no means accept. As he himself  went on to say, «If the attitude expressed 
here is typical of the likes and dislikes of the broadest and currently most  influen-
tial  circles  in  our  modern  reformed  churches  -  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that 
that is the case -  then it is no thankful  task that I have been given today. I am sup-
posed  to  speak  about  reformed  doctrine,  theology,  preaching,  proclamation,  i.e. 
about  all  those  things  about  which  those  in Zürich  remained  <so far  as possible> 
silent...»3 

Two generations  on  it is no bad thing  to be reminded by  Barth  that the ques-
tion of the continuity proper to reformed  confession  is in the end a theological is-
sue, not merely  an historical  or cultural one. The search for marks of  confessional 
continuity  in  the  reformed  family  of  churches  -  whether  as  already  given  or  as 
needing  to  be recovered  -  cannot  bracket  off  the  question  of  the theological  cal-
ling  and  commission  of  the  churches  themselves.  Otherwise  discussion  of 

1  Karl Barth,  Reformierte  Lehre, ihr Wesen und ihre Aufgabe, reprinted  in: Das Wort 

Gottes und die Theologie, München 1929, pp. 179-212. 

2  Op. cit., p.  179. 
3 

Ibid. 

147 

«reformed  continuity»  is  all  too  likely  to remain  on  the  surface,  concerned  more 
with tradition than with truth. 

This said, however, it is still proper for  us to take a look at the reformed  tradi(cid:173)
tion of confession  through the centuries and to ask whether or where signs of con(cid:173)
tinuity can be traced. 

First  of  all, «it could  not escape  any  wakeful  observer»  that the reformed  fa-
mily  of  churches  does  not  and  cannot  lay  claim  to  certain  of  those  patterns  and 
marks of continuity through the centuries which are prominent in some other con-
fessions  and  traditions.  The  reformed  churches  spread  throughout  the  world  of 
today  do  not  belong  to  one,  uniform  Organisation  organically  and  institutionally 
united around  a single visible, earthly centre  and apex, as does the Roman Catho-
lic Church. Nor, unlike the Orthodox  or Anglican communions, do they  constitute 
a  family  united  by  one  pattern  of  church  order  and  a broadly  common  liturgical 
heritage. Nor, unlike the Lutheran fellowship, can they point to one relatively nar-
rowly  defined  selection  of  confessional  documents  stemming  from  the  era  of  the 
Reformation  as  the  definitive  and  abiding  Standard  of  authentic  reformed  faith. 
The  reformed  churches  are  much  too  diverse  in  origins,  order  and  liturgy  to  fit 
into any  of  these patterns;  they  possess  a rieh  abundance  of  confessions  from  the 
most  various  times  and  contexts  over  four-and-a-half  centuries;  they  have  been 
caught  up  more  than  most  other  ecclesiastical  families  in  the  complex  political 
and  social  movements  of  the  modern  era,  both  influencing  and  being  influenced 
by them.  Not  without  ground  has  a recent  collection  of  studies, chiefly  by histo-
rians,  emphasised 
the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries 
«international Calvinism» was a far from  uniform  movement4. That verdict is only 
reinforced  by  consideration  of  the history  of  the reformed  churches  since  the se(cid:173)
venteenth Century. It is hard, at first  sight, to discover any distinetive theological  -
or other -  principle  uniting  the  various  churches  which  belong  to  the  World  Al-
liance  of  Reformed  Churches,  to  say  nothing  of  those  churches  which  are  not 
members  of  the  Alliance,  yet  clearly  do, historically  speaking,  belong  to  the  re(cid:173)
formed  family  in respect of their origins and broad theological tradition5. 

that  even 

in 

Is the answer, then, to be found  in the historical  origins and broad  theological 
tradition  of the reformed  family?  Up to a point, no doubt. But we should be care-
ful  not to overstate the case -  not, at least, it we wish to be realistic  about the ac-
tual  Situation.  It  would  be  overstating  it,  for  instance, to  assert  that  the  reformed 
churches  today  are in one way  or another the heirs of Zwingli  and Bullinger,  Bu-
cer and Calvin, Beza and Knox and know themselves to be committed  to that he-

International Calvinism, 1541-1715, Menna Prestwich (ed.), Oxford 1985. 
One thinks here first  of all of the reformed  churches which do not belong to the Al(cid:173)
liance but to the Reformed Ecumenical Synod -  but also of other churches, such as the 
Disciples of Christ, which have sprung from reformed roots, albeit generally preferring 
not  to  identify  themselves  as  «Reformed»:  Reformed  and  Disciples  of  Christ  in 
Dialogue, A. P. F. Seil (ed.),  Geneva  1985, (Studies from  the World Alliance of Re(cid:173)
formed Churches 6). 

148 

ritage.  Calvin,  certainly,  continues  to  be  regarded  and  treated  as  a  major  point  of 
reference  in  many  reformed  churches,  at  least  so  far  as  theological  education  and 
the  training  of  ministers  goes.  The  others  just  mentioned,  to  say  nothing  of  a  host 
of  others,  are  largely  ignored  and  unkown,  certainly  not  regarded  as  having  any 
special  authority  today.  And  so  far  as  Calvin  is  concerned,  the  scholarly  debates 
about  the  precise  nature  of  the  continuity  and  contrast  between  Calvin's  thought 
and  later  Calvinist  orthodoxy  seem  to  be  Coming  to  take  up  almost  more  space  in 
the  learned  literature  than  serious  engagement  with  Calvin's  thought  for  its  own 
sake6.  There  has  certainly  been  a  significant  Calvin  renaissance  in  the  twentieth 
Century,  comparable  to  the  Luther  renaissance  which  preceded  it; but  it has  remai-
ned  very  largely  the preserve  of  specialists  in  history  and  historical  theology,  only 
here  and  there  trickling  through  to  play  any  really  effective  part  in  the  training  of 
ministers  or  in  shaping  the life  of  the reformed  churches. 

The  Situation  is  largely  similar  in  respect  of  the  old  reformed  confessions.  So 
far  as  the  world  of  Anglo-Saxon  Presbyterianism  is  concerned,  the  Westminister 
Confession  continues  to  retain  a tenuous  hold  on  a kind  of  classical  Status, but  one 
that  is  more  honoured  in  the  breach  than  in  the  observance7.  Confessions  such  as 
the  French  of  1559, the  Scots  of  1560, the  Belgic  of  1561  and  the  Second  Helvetic 
of  1566  are  known  and  used  mostly  as  quarries  for  historical  research.  Of  all  the 
sixteenth  Century  reformed  confessions  and  catechisms,  only  the  Heidelberg  Cate-
chism  of  1563  continues  to  be  widely  used  as  an  instrument  of  education  and  edi-
fication,  and  that  largely  in the German  reformed  churches,  who  well  know  what  a 
treasure  they  have  in  it.  But  perhaps  the  first  two  questions  and  answers  of  the 
Heidelberg  Catechism  itself  can  help  to  carry  us  a  stage  further  in  reflecting  upon 
the continuity  of  reformed  confession  through  history: 
Q. 1.  What  is your  only  comfort,  in  life  and  in  death? 
A. 

That  I  belong  -  body  and  soul,  in  life  and  in  death  -  not  to  myself  but  to 
my  faithful  Savior,  Jesus  Christ,  who  at the  cost  of  his  own  blood  has  fully 
paid  for  all my  sins  and  has  completely  freed  me  from  the  dominion  of  the 
devil;  that  he  protects  me  so  well  that  without  the  will  of  my  Father  in 
heaven  not  a  hair  can  fall  from  my  head;  indeed,  that  everything  must  fit 
his  purpose  for  my  salvation.  Therefore,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  he  also  assures 
me  of  eternal  life,  and  makes  me  wholeheartedly  willing  and  ready  from 
now  on  to  live for  him. 
How  many  things  must  you  know,  that  you  may  live  and  die  in  the  bles-
sedness  of this  comfort? 

Q.2. 

6 

7 

Cf.  e.g. R. T. Kendali, Calvin and English Calvinism to  1649, Oxford  1979; M. C. Bell, 
Calvin and Scottish Theology, the Doctrine of Assurance, Edinburgh  1985. 
Cf.  The  Westminster  Confession  in  the  Church  Today,  Alasdair  Heron  (ed.),  Edin(cid:173)
burgh  1982. 

149 

A. 

Three  things.  First,  the  greatness  of  my  sin  and  wretchedness.  Second, 
how I am freed  from  all my  sins and their wretched  consequences.  Third, 
what gratitude I owe to God for such redemption8. 

One  could  of  course  be  critical  of  the  individualism  of  these  questions  and 
answers,  although  their  «individualism»  is nothing  other  than  a reflection  of  Lu-
ther's insight that the message of the Gospel is only rightly understood  when it is 
understood  as being  «pro  me»,  as the address  of  forgiveness  and  acceptance  and 
commissioning  that  places  each  individual  personally  under  the  promise,  claim 
and challenge  of  the  Gospel. And  there  lies the permanent  and  unchainging  core 
of  the  evangelical  message  in its double  aspect.  First, Jesus  Christ  is  our  faithful 
Saviour, to  whom we belong in life  and  in death.  Second, our own  life  as human 
beings is  set under the triple  sign of  real  sin, proclaimed  forgiveness  and  respon-
sive  gratitude  issuing  in  obedient  Service.  The  particular  form  that  obedient  Ser(cid:173)
vice takes  must  depend  upon  the particular  circumstances  in  which  we  find  our(cid:173)
selves  placed;  the  task  remains  the  same:  to  witness  in  this  world  to  what  the 
Scottish  Covenanters  in  the  seventeenth  Century  called  «the  crown  rights  of  the 
Redeemer». 

What this can alert us to is that continuity  of reformed  confession  is not to be 
looked for in the first  instance in the continuity of reformed  confessions, but in the 
witness and faith  of reformed  Christians. Theology  is a practical discipline; it has 
to do with the calling of men, women and children to glimpse and serve the glory 
of God  displayed  in Jesus  Christ  and in the process  to discover their  own  calling 
to be members  of  a chosen  people, a royal  priesthood.  Or,  as Calvin  put  it at the 
very  beginning  of  the  «Institute»,  all  true  and  proper  Knowledge  consists  in 
knowledge  of  God  and  of  ourselves;  the  two  are  intimately  connected;  and  the 
true  function  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is  to  awaken  and  enable  trust  and 
obedience9. 

But  there  is  still  a  further  step  to  take. Confession  is  always  a  matter  of  te-
stimony.  And  the  question  has  to  be  asked:  Who  testifies,  before  whom  and  for 
whom? There is a great temptation  for  Christians, reformed  and other, to imagine 
that confession  and  testimony  means, first,  last and  all the time, their  confession, 
their testimony, their witness before  the world and God to the Gospel and the per-
son of Jesus Christ, to set themselves in the role of the witness who is faithful  and 
true. But that designation  is reserved  for  another: the witness, testimony  and con(cid:173)
fession  on which Christian  faith  and hope and love depend from  Start to finish  are 
not ours but those of Jesus Christ, the one «faithful  and true witness»  (Rev. 3.14). 
He  is  the  witness  before  the  court  of  the  world  to  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  his 
creation  and to humankind.  He  is the witness  before  God the  Father  that  the  sins 
and  failings  of  this  same humankind  have been  borne  and  carried  away.  He  is in 
his own person the witness to all who believe of the covenant  which will not pass 

8 

9 

The Constitution  of the United Presbyterian  Church in the United States of America, 
Part I: Book of Confessions, Philadelphia 1967. 
Calvin, Inst. I, 1, 1; 1,2, 1. 

150 

away,  for  it  is built  on  nothing  less than  the  faithfulness  of  the triune  God. Jesus 
Christ, «the same yesterday, today and always», is the sole proper ground, content 
and  goal  of  all  Christian  and  therefore  also  of  all  reformed  confession.  Our  con(cid:173)
fession  echoes and is carried by his and cannot stop short at itself. To speak of re(cid:173)
formed  confession  and reformed  confessions  is not to speak of anything other than 
Christian  confession  and  Christian  confessions  which  attempt  -  and  that  is  the 
proper  and  original  sense  of  «reformed»  in this  context  -  to  make precisely  that 
clear and to give the glory to God. 

Yet the Single, normative testimony of Jesus Christ supports and is reflected  in 
a  long  history  of  Christian  confession  and  Christian  confessions,  a  history  of 
which reformed  confession  and reformed  confessions  are a part. And here we are 
confronted  with and must take seriously the complex history and variety of the re(cid:173)
formed  churches  with  their  various  traditions,  church  Orders, liturgical patterns  -
and their numerous confessions  of ancient or modern provenance. 

The  multifold  character  of  the reformed  churches  in  the  world  of  today  cer-
tainly does not make our enquiry  at this point  any easier. But it ought also to be a 
cause  for  rejoicing.  If  it puzzles  us because  of  the lack of  obvious  unity  in struc-
ture, liturgy  and  order,  it  can  at  the  same  time  help  us  to  see  that  what  is of  the 
esse of the church is not necessarily to be looked for on that level. More than that: 
it should be a positive encouragement to realise to what an extent precisely the re(cid:173)
formed  church  has proved  capable  of  leaping  over boundaries  of  culture  and tra-
dition in order to establish  itself  in new  and unfamiliar  settings  far  from  its origi(cid:173)
nal  European  heartland.  There  has  been,  is  today  and  doubtless  will  be  into  the 
future  a dynamic  at work in the reformed  family  which cannot be neatly theologi-
cally -  or  otherwise -  categorised,  except  by  saying  that  it is the dynamic  of  the 
Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  in  interaction  with  the  lives  of  human  beings  in  cultures 
and civilisations far from  the old European centre of the western church, albeit by 
no means  unaffected  by  the impact  of  western  society.  That  should  be  a  sign of 
hope for the future,  even in a world threatened by national rivalry, by  dictatorship 
and by poverty. 

If  there  is one thread  which  runs through  reformed  confessions  from  the  six-
teenth  to  the twentieth  Century,  it is the  repeated  affirmation  of  the glory  of  God 
and  the  calling  of  humankind  to  be  children  of  the  Father  in  and  through  Jesus 
Christ  by  the  power  of  his  Spirit.  This  too  is  in  itself  nothing  exclusively  refor(cid:173)
med; it is, rather, universally Christian. Recognition  of that fact has certainly been 
one reason  why  so many ecumenical  impulses  in the last Century have gone  forth 
from  reformed  churches.  If,  from  the  seventeenth  Century  to  the  eighteenth,  they 
showed  a  depressing  tendency  to  sectionalism,  fragmentation,  and  division,  they 
have  for  the  last  Century  and  more  been  marked  increasingly  by  a  concern  to 
rediscover  and  re-express  the  unity  in  Jesus  Christ  which  binds  all  Christians 
together.  More  is involved  here than  simply  the work of  ecclesiastical joinery,  as 
the  work  of  ecumenical  negotiations  has  more  than  once  in  unflattering  fashion 
been  described.  Institutional  «joinery»  is  part  of  the  task  and,  in the  appropriate 

151 

time  and  place,  important.  But  more  important  still  is  the  rediscovery  by 
Christians  of the fellowship  that unites them above  and beyond  their  confessional 
divisions.  That  discovery  belongs  irreversibly  to  the  ecumenical  reality  of  the 
world of today -  and, no doubt also, tomorrow. 

The  attempt  to  reconsider  the  continuity  of  reformed  confession  through  the 
centuries  and  across  the  continents  ought  not  therefore  to  be  undertaken  in  any 
narrowly  confessional  or  denominational  spirit.  Whatever  marks,  signs  or  notes 
we may  discover  or  suggest,  they  have to be tested  not  only  to  see  whether  they 
are  authentically  «reformed»,  phenomenologically  or  historically  speaking,  but 
also  whether  they  are  authentically  Christian  and  correspond  to  the  demands  of 
confessing  the faith  in today's  world. To take a simple but by no means trivial ex-
ample  from  the related  area of forms  of  worship: for  centuries  many if not all re(cid:173)
formed  churches  regarded  the  use  of  an  organ  in  worship  as  something  ap-
proaching  blasphemy,  and certainly  not as consonant  with the principles  of  refor(cid:173)
med  liturgy.  That  is hardly  the case  today  in the vast majority  of  reformed  chur(cid:173)
ches throughout  the world. What was once upheld, at least by some, as a reformed 
«proprium»  has  been  in  effect  abandoned  -  and most  of  us  would  doubtless  say, 
rightly  so. Or, to take a related but theologically  much more substantial  issue: the 
second  commandment,  «Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image...»  is 
much  more  heavily  and  consciously  emphasised  by  reformed  churches  in  main-
land Europe, surrounded  as they are by Roman  Catholics  and Lutherans  who  fol-
low the  medieval  reorganisation  and  renumbering  of  the Decalogue, than it is by 
British  and  American  Presbyterians  in  whose  culture  the  biblical  arrangement  of 
the  Decalogue  from  Exodus  20 has  been  accepted  since  the  sixteenth  Century  as 
simply  normal.  (The  attitude  to church  decoration  also tends  to be  very  different 
in these different  settings!)  Again,  a Scots Presbyterian  like myself, Coming  from 
what has been  described  as the high  catholic  wing  of  the reformed  tradition  with 
its  solemn  emphasis  upon  the  authority  and  responsibility  of  the  Presbytery,  is 
sometimes forced  to rub his eyes and look again when confronted  with  Statements 
by  German  reformed  theologians  insisting  that the distinctive  reformed  emphasis 
is on the fundamental  ascription of authority to the local congregation rather than 
on synodal fellowship. To say the least, some care is needed here in  disentangling 
the authentically  reformed  from  the accidentally reformed  features. We should not 
be surprised to find that the same is the case with the history of reformed  confes-
sions. 

It would be quite impossible within the scope of this paper to attempt anything 
like a thorough  study of the history of reformed  confessions  and their theological 
contents  and emphases. The last attempt to publish  a more or less  comprehensive 
collection  -  E.  F.  Karl  Müller's  «Die  Bekenntnisschriften  der  reformierten  Kir(cid:173)
che»,  which  appeared  in  190310  -  contained  no  fewer  than  58  documents,  the 

10  Die  Bekenntnisschriften  der  reformierten  Kirche, E.  F.  Karl Müller (ed.), Leipzig 

1903. Two important  older collections  compiled  in  Germany  were H. A.  Niemeyer, 
Collectio Confessionum  in Ecclesiis Reformatis Publicatarum, Leipzig 1840, and H. J. 

152 

oldest  being  Zwingli's  «Schlußreden»  of  1523  and  the  youngest  the  North  Ameri(cid:173)
can  Statement  on  the  revision  of  the  Westminster  Confession  presented  to  the  Ge(cid:173)
neral  Assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  U.S.A.  in  1902  (and  subse-
quently  approved  in  1903).  Müller  divided  these  up  into  nine  separate  groups:  1. 
Pre-Calvinist  confessions;  2.  Swiss  confessions  after  Calvin's  arrival  on  the  scene; 
3.  Confessions  from  the  West  (i.e. Western  Europe  in  the  third  quarter  of  the  six-
teenth  Century);  4.  Hungarian  confessions;  5.  Pre-reformation  groups  (Bohemian 
Brethren  and  Waldensians);  6.  Anglicanism  and  Puritanism;  7.  The  German  terri-
tories;  8.  Orthodox  decisions  on  specific  doctrines  (the  Canons  of  Dordt  and  the 
Helvetic  Formula  of  Consensus);  9.  Modern  confessions.  To  this  must  be  added 
the  coUection  of  twentieth-century  reformed  confessions  edited  by  Lukas  Vi(cid:173)
scher11.  These  two  volumes  together  provide  the  most  wide-ranging  coUection  of 
material  so  far  available,  but  there  is  more  that  could  be  included  in  a  really  com-
prehensive  edition12.  Useful  but  more  selective  collections  can  be  found  in  the 
third  volume  of  Philip  Schaff  's  «The  Creeds  of  Christendom»13,  in  Wilhelm  Nie-
sel's  «Bekenntnisschriften  und  Kirchenordnungen»14,  and  in  the  1967  «Book  of 
Confessions»  of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  of  Ame(cid:173)
rica15.  This  last  coUection  can  be  taken  as  fairly  representative  of  a  widespread  if 
not  universal  reformed  consensus  upon  which  confessions  may  claim  a  kind  of 
classical  Status,  though  it  is  a  deficit  that  it  includes  no  Eastern  European  docu-
ments16.  It  contains  the  Nicene  Creed;  the  Apostles'  Creed;  the  Scots  Confession; 

L.  Heppe,  Die  Bekenntnis-Schriften  der  reformierten  Kirche  Deutschlands,  Elberfeld 
1860. Older  still:  William Dunlop,  A  CoUection  of  Confessions  of  Faith,  Catechisms, 
Directories, Book of Discipline, etc. Of Publick Authority in the Church  of Scotland, 2 
vols., Edinburgh  1719. 

1'  Reformed  Witness  Today,  a CoUection  of  Confessions  and  Statements  of Faith  issued 

by  Reformed  Churches,  Lukas  Vischer  (ed.),  Bern  1982.  German  translation:  Refor(cid:173)
miertes  Zeugnis  heute,  eine  Sammlung  neuerer  Bekenntnistexte  aus  der  reformierten 
Tradition, hrsg. von Lukas  Vischer, Neukirchen-Vluyn  1988. 

12  An  even  fuller  coUection  than  Müller 's has  been  in  planning  for  some  years  in  West 
Germany and work is at present proceeding on it. A new series of volumes of evangeli-
cal  (including  reformed)  confessions  from  east  central  Europe  has  also  recently  been 
begun:  Ostmitteleuropas  Bekenntnisschriften  der  evangelischen  Kirchen  A. und  H. B. 
des  Reformationszeitalters,  hrsg.  von  Peter  F.  Barton  und  Laszlo  Makkai,  Budapest 
1987ff. 

13  The  Creeds  of  Christendom,  with  a  History  and  Critical  Notes,  ed.  by  Philip Schaff, 
rev. by David S. Schaff,  3 vols., 6th edition,  New  York  1931 (reprinted  Grand  Rapids 
1983). 

14  Bekenntnisschriften  und Kirchenordnungen  der nach Gottes Wort reformierten  Kirche, 
Wilhelm  Niesei  (ed.),  2nd  edition,  Zollikon-Zürich  1938  (reprinted  Zürich  1985);  cf. 
also Reformierte  Bekenntnisschriften  und Kirchenordnungen  in deutscher Übersetzung, 
Paul Jacobs  (ed.), Neukirchen  1949. 

15  The  Constitution  of  the  United  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  of  America, 
Part  I:  Book  of  Confessions,  Philadelphia  1967;  cf.  also  Jack  Rogers,  Presbyterian 
Creeds, a Guide to the Book of Confessions, Philadelphia  1985. 

16  Nor, for that matter, do either Schaff or Niesei. This is not perhaps surprising, given the 
predominantly  Western-ecumenical  orientation of Schaffand  Niesel's concern to  stiffen 

153 

the  Heidelberg  Catechism;  the  Second  Helvetic  Confession;  the Westminster  Con-
fession;  the  (Westminster)  Shorter  Catechism;  the  Theological  Declaration  of 
Barmen;  and  the  United  Presbyterian  Church's  own  Confession  of  1967.  Also  im-
portant  in  this  context  is  Thomas  F.  Torrance's  «The  School  of  Faith»17,  which 
makes  available  in  one  volume  the  most  influential  reformed  catechisms  of  the 
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries,  together  with  an  extended  introduction  which 
goes  in  more  detail  than  most  of  the  other  collections  mentioned  do  into  the  theo-
logy  of  the  catechisms18. 

It  is  clear  from  this  selective  list  that  a  füll  analysis  of  the  theology  of  the  re(cid:173)
formed  confessions  would  have  in  the  end  to  amount  to  nothing  less  than  a  füll 
scale  analysis  of  the  entire  history  of  reformed  theology19.  All  I  can  attempt  here 
is  to  pick  out  at  least  some  elements  which  do  appear  to  be  distinctive  and  to 
reappear  repeatedly  in  both  older  and  more  recent  confessions,  and  which  there-
fore  are  in  some  way  connected  with  the  continuity  of  reformed  witness  through 
the  centuries. 
1. It  is an  essential  element  in reformed  belief,  witness  and  worship  that  God  rules 
over  the  world  and  its history,  that  the  universe  is not  governed  by  chance  or  arbi-
trariness,  but  by  divine  providence,  covenant  and  law.  This  conviction  has  two  si-
des.  First,  God  is  in control  of  the  world  and  guides  it to  the  ends  which  his  provi-

the spine of the German reformed  churches in the confrontation  with the Nazi  ideology 
and  the  «German  Christians»  -  which  may  in  turn  remind  us  that  it  is  always  worth 
asking  what  special  academic  or  theological  interest  underlies  and  shapes  any  collec-
tion of reformed  confessions.  But, historically  speaking, it does less than justice to the 
role  played  by  reformed  churches  in  Eastern  Europe,  particularly  in  Czechoslovakia, 
Hungary and the Hungarian territory in Romania. -  A further  deficit  nearer home could 
have been  made  good  by the inclusion either of  the French  Confession  of  1559 or the 
Belgic of  1561. These  are markedly  similar to each other in style  and content  but very 
different  in  structure  from  either  the  Scots  or  Second  Helvetic  Confession,  and  there-
fore offer  a different  model of a classical reformed  confession. 

17  The  School  of  Faith,  the  Catechisms  of  the  Reformed  Church,  Thomas  F.  Torrance 

18 

(ed.), London and New York  1959. 
See also  Creeds of the Churches, a Reader  in Christian  Doctrine from  the Bible to the 
Present, John H. Leith  (ed.),  Chicago and Garden City  1963; Reformed  Confessions  of 
the  16th  Century, Arthur  C. Cochrane  (ed.),  edited  with  historical  introductions, Phil(cid:173)
adelphia 1966. 

19  This  is  no  doubt  one  of  the  reasons  why  there  is  a pretty  extensive  literature  dealing 
with individual  confessions  but -  apart from  collected editions such as those mentioned 
above  -  no  major  or  detailed  study  of  the  entire  history  of  reformed  confessions.  At-
tempts  at  a  wider  coverage  -  e.g.  C.  G.  McCrie,  The  Confessions  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  Edinburgh  1907  [hereinafter  cited  as:  McCrie,  Confessions],  or,  more  re-
cently,  Paul Jacobs,  Theologie  reformierter  Bekenntnisschriften  in  Grundzügen,  Neu(cid:173)
kirchen  1959 -  remain extremely  selective  as compared  with what is offered  by Schaff, 
Müller  or, for  the twentieth  Century,  Wischer.  On the other hand,  the  vast  literature on 
the history  of reformed  thought  and theology  does  not as a rule concentrate  on the re(cid:173)
formed  confessions. -  The more recent study by Jan Rohls, Theologie reformierter  Be(cid:173)
kenntnisschriften,  von Zürich bis Barmen,  Göttingen  1987, (UTB  1453), is therefore  a 
useful  step  forward. 

154 

dence, goodness  and  mercy  have  ordained.  We  are  neither  the creatures  of  blind 
fate  nor  the  products  of  accident,  however  deterministic  or  arbitrary  the  events 
that overtake us may appear.  Second, even the evil that can and does occur in the 
world lies in God's hand  and  is used  by him  as an instrument  of his glory  and, in 
the  end,  for  the  good  of  his  creation.  Against  all dualism,  gnosticism,  manichae-
ism  and  fatalism  the reformed  tradition  affirms:  the  Lord reigns! A host  of  affir-
mations from  older and newer reformed  confessions  could be quoted here; instead 
let me cite the metrical Version of Psalm 93 as a reminder that reformed  theology 
and  worship  alike  were  shaped  from  Calvin's  time  onward  by  the  singing  of  the 
psalms20: 

The Lord doth reign, and clothed is he 
With majesty  most bright; 
His works do show him clothed to be, 
And gilt about with might. 

The world is also stablished, 
That it cannot depart. 
Thy throne is fixed  of old, and thou 
From everlasting art. 

The floods, O Lord, have lifted  up, 
They lifted  up their voice; 
The floods have lifted  up their waves, 
And made a mighty noise. 

But yet the Lord, that is on high, 
Is more of might by far 
Than noise of many waters is, 
Or great sea-billows are. 

Thy testimonies every one 
In faithfulness  excel; 
And holiness for ever, Lord, 
Thine house becometh well. 

This may seem a hard saying in view of the suffering,  pain, guilt, injustice  and de-
feat that are part and parcel of everyday human experience. But it is not, biblically 
understood,  a hard  saying: rather  a testimony  of  hope and  a promise  of  final  vic-
tory.  Human  life  brings  suffering  and,  at  the  end,  death.  It  may  seem  pointless, 
aimless  and worthless. The Gospel teils us otherwise: not, admittedly, that  «God's 

20 

«The Church Hymnary», 3rd edition, Oxford  1973, no. 140. 

155 

in his heaven and all's well with the world», but that because God is in his heaven, 
he, and not all evil which  is really  there  in us and in the world,  will have the last 
word.  He will have the last word because  he has  already  spoken  it -  spoken  it in 
the  eternal  generation  of  the  Son,  spoken  it  in  the  creation  of  the  world  from 
nothing,  spoken  it in the incarnation,  cross  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  spo(cid:173)
ken it in the sending of his Spirit. The destiny  of our world and our universe is not 
to end  with  a bang or a whimper,  to be snuffed  out in despair  and desolation, but 
to be consummated  in a song of praise to the God who does not let go of the work 
of his hands, but is able to bring forth life from  death: 

And so, as we confess  that God the Father created us when we were not, as his 
Son our Lord Jesus redeemed us when we were enemies to him, so also do we 
confess  that  the  Holy  Ghost  does  sanctify  and  regenerate  us, without  respect 
to any merit proceeding  from  us, be it before  or after  our regeneration. To put 
this even more plainly; as we willingly disclaim  any honour and glory  for our 
own creation and redemption, so do we willingly also for our regeneration and 
sanctification;  for  by  ourselves  we  are  not  capable  of  thinking  one  good 
thought, but he who has begun the work  in us alone continues us in it, to the 
praise and glory of his undeserved grace21. 

These  sentences  from  the Scots Confession  of  1560 make clearer than most  other 
representatives of the early reformed  tradition the inner connexion and parallel be-
tween  creation,  reconciliation  and redemption  to  which  inter  alia  Col.  1.15-20 so 
impressively  witnesses  when it speaks of Christ as «the first-born  of all creation... 
the firstborn  from  the dead». They supply the necessary corrective to the tendency 
of much early reformed  theology to follow  Calvin in distinguishing all too sharply 
between  the  knowledge  of  God  the  Creator  and  the  knowledge  of  God  the  Re-
deemer  in  Christ,  to  the point  where  the  doctrines  of  God,  creation  and  sin,  and 
with them those of providence and predestination, could be unfolded  independent-
ly  of  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  leads  on  to  our next  central  theme  of re(cid:173)
formed  confession. 
2.  The  reformed  conviction,  testimony,  and  proclamation  is  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
Lord to the glory  of the Father;  in him the gracious  goodwill  of the Father for  all 
mankind  has  been  realised,  established  and  made  known.  Just  here  is  the  place 
where  classical,  orthodox  Calvinism  went  so badly  wrong  with  its  understanding 
of double predestination  and its implication  of  «limited»  or «definite»  atonement, 
formulated  especially  sharply  in  the  decrees  of  Dordt  and  the  Westminster  Con(cid:173)
fession. That tradition was right in discerning that God's gracious choice necessa-
rily involves rejection;  it was  wrong  in holding  that that choice  and rejection  had 
to do with an eternal decree to elect some human beings and reject others. What it 
failed  to  see  and  to  recognise  is  that  God's  decisive  rejection  of  human  sin  took 
place once for all on the cross of Golgotha, that Jesus Christ died for all humanity 

21  Scots Confession,  12, in the modern translation by James Bulloch (The Scots Confes(cid:173)

sion, 1560, Edinburgh 1960, p. 67). 

156 

and  that  the  reconciliation  which  he  in  his  own  person  is  holds  good  for  all 
humankind in every age, past, present and  future22. 

This, by  contrast  to point  1. above, may  seem  at first  sight a too easy  saying, 
opening the way to the proclamation  of «cheap  grace»  and the idea of the  apoka-
stasis panton.  But  the  accusation  is unjustified.  It  is the  message  of  the  good  fa-
vour  of  God  to  all  in  Jesus  Christ  that  alone  makes  clear  wherein  human  sin  fi-
nally consists: it is above  all the refusal  to accept, recognise and live by the grace 
of  God  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  arrogance,  laziness  and  falsehood,  leading  respecti-
vely to fallenness, misery and damnation23. 
3.  It  belongs  to  the  tradition  of  reformed  witness  that  we  are  bound  on  the  one 
hand  to  the  Holy  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and New  Testaments,  on  the  other  to the 
energising  and  illuminating  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  The  word  written 
and the  Holy  Spirit  enabling  are  the twin  poles, both  binding  us to  God's  revela-
tion  and  at  the  same  time  setting  us  free  to  respond  to  it.  The  witness  of  the 
Scriptures  accompanies  and  guides  the  life  of  the  Christian  Community  through 
the ages; the church of Jesus Christ is a church that lives by and from  the Word of 
God  in  him  to  which  the  Scriptures  witness.  A church  which  is no  longer  inter-
ested in hearing the Scriptures ceases thereby to be a reformed  church; a church in 
which preaching  is understood  simply as a rhetorical  or liturgical exercise, merely 
using this or that word or phrase from  the Bible as a springboard  or coathanger, is 
in  danger  of  cutting  itself  off  from  the  source  of  its  life.  And  there  can  be  little 
doubt that some contemporary  reformed  churches, especially  in the affluent  West, 
are in danger of doing precisely that. At the same time, the hearing of the Word in 
Scripture  is  no  slavish  fundamentalism,  no  mere  blinkered  commitment  to  a 
«paper pope». It is a lively, engaged hearing that seeks to receive and discover the 
bearing  of  the biblical  testimony  on the present  time  and  its direction  for  the  fu(cid:173)
ture. Precisely for this reason is it a hearing that relies and depens upon the promi-
sed gift  of the  Holy  Spirit, by  whom  the Scriptures  were inspired  and  who  alone 
can open their sense to us. 

This path too, however, is beset by snares. One is the tendency, very  apparent 
in  the  development  of  reformed  theology  in  the  age  of  orthodoxy,  to  unfold  and 
insist upon a rather wooden notion of «inspiration», a notion more rationalist than 
biblical  in  origin.  Another,  equally  well  documented  historically,  is the  tendency 

22  The principle, somewhere formulated  by James Orr, borrowing from Harnack, that «the 
history  of  dogma  is the criticism  of  dogma»  applies  equally  to the history  of  reformed 
theology.  The  doctrines  of  double  predestination  and  limited  atonement  which  the 
Synod  of  Dordt established  as pivots  of  «Calvinism»  met their most determined Oppo(cid:173)
sition  within  reformed  theology  itself,  not  least  in  Scotland  in  the  nineteenth  Century: 
cf.  James B.  Torrance, The Contribution  of John  McLeod  Campbell to Scottish  Theo(cid:173)
logy, in: Scottish Journal  of Theology  26.3, 1973, pp. 295-311. -  It was of course Karl 
Barth  who  went  on  radically 
the  doctrines  of  predestination  and 
reconciliation  christologically  and  so  to  correct  and  deepen  the  old  tradition  of 
reformed  orthodoxy. 

to  rework 

23  Cf. Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics IV/1-3, passim. 

157 

to  identify  the  doctrine  of  the  Scriptures  with  the  truths  expressed  in  an  official 
confessional  document  or  with  a particular  conception  of  the  proper  structure  of 
the  church.  One example  of  each  of  these  last  must  suffice  here.  (1) In  1559 the 
French Confession  insisted that the church of Jesus Christ must always be ordered 
according  to the pattern  which  Christ  himself  appointed -  and  went on  immedia-
tely  to  identify  this  order  with  the  Genevan  pattern  of  pastors,  eiders  and  dea-
cons24. Now, the Genevan  pattern  has  a great  deal to be  said for  it;  it was one of 
Calvin's major  contributions  to the revitalising  of church  structure and function  in 
the  sixteenth  Century  and  has  proved  its  strength  through  the  centuries  since. 
Combined  with  synodal  Organisation  it  has  served  well  as  the  basis  for  the  only 
real  alternative  to  the  patristic  and  medieval  patterns  perpetuated  in  other  major 
confessional  families.  But it cannot properly  be said to be the biblical pattern ap(cid:173)
pointed  and  ordained  by  Christ  himself,  against  which  all  other  forms  must  be 
measured  and  found  wanting.  (2)  Again,  when  Alexander  Scott  was  on  trial  for 
heresy before the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland in  1831 -  the same 
Assembly  which deposed John McLeod Campbell from  the ministry for his teach-
ing on universal atonement -  Scott admitted that his views, which were similar to 
Campbell's,  were  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  the  Westminister  Confession.  «Mr. 
Scott undertook to show that wherein he differed  from  the symbol it differed  from 
Scripture. But the court declined to listen to such a defence,  and, acting on the de-
claration  that  he did  not believe  the  whole  doctrine  of  the  Westminster  Standard, 
withdrew  from  him his license to preach  the gospel»25. Both these examples may 
serve to illustrate  the dangers to which a strongly  committed  theological  tradition 
can be exposed  when it too quickly  identifies  its own  Standards of  doctrine or Or(cid:173)
der  with  the  biblical  teaching.  Nevertheless  the  principle  remains:  a  reformed 
church is a church that lives by hearing of the Word of God which became flesh in 
Jesus Christ, is witnessed in the Scriptures and ever and again communicates itself 
through the testimony and proclamation of the church. 

4. The  «reformed»  reformers  of  the  sixteenth  Century laid especial  weight  on the 
insistence  that  they  were founding  no  new  church  but rather  seeking  to re-estab-
lish the authentic tradition of Christian faith, teaching and practice. They  appealed 
with  considerable  learning  to  the  church  fathers,  insisting  (with  good  grounds) 
that  more  Support  was  to be found  there  for  their  views  and  convictions  than  for 
the accreted traditions of the medieval  western church. That is, they appealed  to a 
continuity  of  belief  and  confession  other  than  that represented  by  the  contempo-
rary  ecclesiastical  establishment.  It  is  no  accident  that  so  many  of  the  major  re(cid:173)
formers  of  that  period  came  from  a humanist  background,  though  a  sharp  divide 
opened  up between  humanists  and reformers  on the  matter  of  the freedom  of  the 
human  will  to  discern  and  strive  after  what  is  pleasing  to  God.  But  the  cry  «ad 

24  French Confession, 29, in: Creeds of Christendom, vol. 3, pp. 376f; the same claim is 

made in 2-3 of the 1561 Genevan Ordonnances Ecclesiastiques (in Niesei, Bekenntnis(cid:173)
schriften, p. 43) for the füll four-fold pattern (including «les Docteurs»). 

25  McCrie, Confessions, p. 106. 

158 

fontes!»  was the motto  of  the reformers  too: they  were convinced  that  they  were 
doing nothing more or other than restoring  the church  to its proper  State and Con(cid:173)
stitution. Not adaptation to the conditions of their time lay in the forefront  of their 
concern,  but  recovery  of  the  original,  authentic  and  permanent.  And  they  were 
convinced that this recovery  would bring with it the necessary  light upon contem-
porary social, ethical and political responsibility  as well. 

By contrast, the world  of today  seems to many to be so different  from  the an-
cient world that no continuity  of this kind can any longer obtain. Our world is go-
verned  and  shaped  by  so  many  other  mechanisms,  impulses  and  energies  that 
theological  reflection  alone  seems  inadequate  to  cope  with  it,  and  any  idea  that 
theological  conviction  can  suffice  to  shape  the  lives  of  individuals  or  societies 
either naive  or dangerously  fanatical.  We are faced  today with the reality  of mas(cid:173)
sive  military  power  in  a fashion  that no  previous  generation  could  even  contem-
plate,  let  alone  experience.  We  are  also  faced  with  the  challenges  of  modern 
science  and  technology,  with  the  problems  of  a juster  distribution  of  resources, 
with the advances  of medicine  and the issues of  euthanasia,  gene technology  and 
the propagation  of human  life  under laboratory  conditions. At least, we are  faced 
with these  in the  affluent  First  World;  in the reformed  family  as  a whole  we  are 
also confronted  with the fact  that the greater part of  the human  race has little ac-
cess to (and less chance of influencing)  these  scientific,  technical and medical de-
velopments,  but  remains  exposed  to  their  consequences.  The  shaping  of  human 
life and of the quality of living conditions has become largely the concern  of poli-
tics, trade  and  technology:  does this leave  any effective  or positive role for  theo-
logy? 

Just  such  issues  of  our  time  can,  however,  serve  to  remind  us  that  impulses 
from  reformed  theology, teaching and witness from  the sixteenth Century onwards 
played  a decisive part both in enabling the rise of scientific  and technological  au-
tonomy  in the West  and  in shaping  the structures  of modern  political  democracy. 
Far  more  than  the  Lutheran  reformation,  the  reformed  movement  stimulated  a 
new, radical form  of quest for truth and reality, which became in turn a main mo-
tor  of  Western  civilisation.  The  search  for  objectivity  in  theological  questioning 
went hand  in hand  with the  search for  objectivity  in the understanding  of  nature; 
the concern  for  the glory  of  God fostered  a new  sensitivity  to human  dignity  and 
human  rights.  That  is  the  positive  side  of  the  balance.  The  negative  is  perhaps 
even  better  known:  that these  very  advances  have been  accompanied  by  an  enor-
mous increase  in the materially  destructive  potential  of the human race. Precisely 
that makes it essential for reformed  theology and reformed  confession  in the First, 
Second  or Third World  to retain  in view  what the old reformed  tradition  insisted: 
that the chief  end of human  life  is to glorify  God and enjoy  him for  ever; that we 
are  set  in  the  world  to  be  responsible  before  God  for  our  stewardship;  that  even 
our noblest  aspirations  and achievements  are flawed.  Society, politics, economics 
and  science  may  and  do change, and  with  them  change  the terms  and  conditions 
under which human life  is lived; but we have the same human nature as our fore-

159 

fathers. In this sense, concern  for  confessional  continuity  is neither a luxury nor a 
form  of  escapism  but  a  necessary  expression  of  responsibility  in  the  world  of 
today and tomorrow, however that world may be shaped and governed. 

In conclusion  I would  offer  one final  thought.  The classical refoimed  confes-
sions  of the  sixteenth  Century were for  the most part  originally  local  confessions, 
yet  local  confessions  with  a universal  vision. When  a city,  a nation,  an  area  or a 
province  was refoimed,  it did not  as a rule  simply take over a confession  already 
promulgated  elsewhere,  but  issued  its  own  as  a public  manifesto  claiming  to ex-
press in its own way the same faith  held by other churches refoimed  according  to 
the  Word  of  God.  Such  confessions  were  then  also  commonly  accepted,  re-
cognised and used in other churches too, but that was a secondary step. In drawing 
up a confession  or catechism, the aim was thus first  to set out, as it were for  inter(cid:173)
nal  use, the  outline  of  the  main  points  of  the  faith  requiring  affirmation;  and  se-
cond, to hold out this confession  to the world at large, and to other refoimed  chur(cid:173)
ches in particular,  to be tested  and weighed for its adequacy  and authenticity. The 
classical  sixteenth  Century  confessions  were  thus,  precisely  in  their  local  origins 
and  character,  part  of  a  kind  of  international  dialogue  of  testimony  and  testing. 
Today,  too, refoimed  churches  throughtout  the  world  should  seek  to  express  the 
faith  as  it  bears  upon  and  is  apprehended  in  their  Situation  -  and  to pay  heed  to 
each other as they do so. 

Prof. Dr. Alasdair I. C. Heron, Theologische Fakultät  der  Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Kochstrasse 6, D-W-8520 Erlangen 

160 

