Governed  and  Guided  by the  Spirit 

A  Key  Issue  in  Calvin's  Doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

by  I.  JOHN  HESSELINK 

/. 

Introduction 

Because  I  am  focusing  on  what  might  appear  to  be  one  small  facet  of  Calvin's  un-
derstanding  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Christian  life,  it  may  be  helpful 
to  share  some  presuppositions  before  stating  some  theses  in  regard  to  this  ques-
tion. Thereby  you  can  see  where  I  am  Coming  from  and  where  I am  going. 

1. Although  Calvin  is  frequently  acknowledged  as  «the  theologian  of  the  Holy 
Spirit»1  among  the  sixteenth  Century  reformers,  an  important  aspect  of  his 
doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit  has  been  neglected,  namely,  how  the  Holy  Spirit  leads, 
guides, governs,  and  rules  in  the life  of  the  believer2. 

2.  A  fundamental  presupposition  here  is  the  close  relationship  of  the  Word 
(Scripture)  and  Spirit  in  Calvin's  theology3.  «The  Spirit  acts  in  and  through  the 
Word  and  the  Word  is  confirmed  by  the  Spirit»4.  At  the  same  time,  however,  it  is 
generally  agreed  that  Calvin  allowed  for  a  greater  freedom  of  the  Spirit  over 
against  the Word  than  Luther,  who  tended  to unite  them5. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

First,  as  far  as  I  know,  by  B.  B. Warfield,  and  subsequently  by  a  number  of  Calvin 
scholars  including  Simon  van der Linde, Werner  Krusche, John  Mackay, and H. Quis-
torp. 
S. van der Linde,  who  deserves  the credit  for  writing  the  first  substantial  treatment of 
Calvin's  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  does  not  deal  with  this  theme  at  all, even  in  his 
discussions  of religion and piety, faith  and regeneration  (Simon van der Linde, De Leer 
van  de  Heiligen  Geest  bij  Calvijn,  Wageningen  1943,  232ff  [abbr.:  van  der  Linde, 
Leer]). Nor does H. J. J.  Th. Quistorp take note of  these phrases  in his rather compre-
hensive  study: Calvins Lehre vom Heiligen  Geist,  in: De Spiritu  Sancto, Utrecht  1964 
[abbr.:  Quistorp,  Lehre]. Werner Krusche  is  aware  of  these  phrases  in  his  magisterial 
study:  Das  Wirken  des  Heiligen  Geistes  nach  Calvin,  Göttingen  1957,  (FKDG  7) 
[abbr.:  Krusche,  Wirken]; but  he  tends to  be too  apologetic  lest  a  subjective  tendency 
might  be  found  in  Calvin.  One  of  the  finest  treatments  of  a related  theme -  the  secret 
impulse of the Spirit (arcano Spiritus instinctu) -  is found  in a surprising place, viz., the 
appendix  to  Benjamin  Charles  Milner  Jr.,  Calvin's  Doctrine  of  the  Church,  Leiden 
1970, (SHCT 5), 197ff  [abbr.: Milner, Doctrine]. 
See Institutes 1.9.3  and IV.8.13. Here and elsewhere I am using the translation  of Ford 
Lewis  Battles  in  the  Library  of  Christian  Classics  edition  of  the  Institutes  edited  by 
John T. McNeill, Philadelphia  1960. 
Richard  C. Gamble, Word  and  Spirit  in  Calvin, in: Calvin  and  the Holy  Spirit,  ed. by 
Peter De Klerk, Grand Rapids  1989, 85 [abbr.: Gamble, Word]. In the same volume see 
also the paper by Jelle Faher, The Saving Work of the Holy Spirit in Calvin,  4f. 
So e.g., Quistorp, Lehre  140. 

161 

3.  A  corollary  of  this  thesis  is  the  intimate  relation  between  Christ  and  the 
Spirit  in  Calvin's  thought6.  Benjamin  Milner  affirms  that  «Calvin  will  not  speak  of 
the  Spirit  apart  from  Christ  any  more  than  he  will  speak  of  Christ  without  the 
Spirit»7, although  there  appear  to be  many  exceptions  to  this rule  if taken  literally. 
4.  Such  convictions  separated  Calvin  from  the  «spiritualists»  and  «enthusi-
asts»  (Schwärmer)  of  his  day  and  their  descendants  in  our  own  time,  whether  the 
heirs  of  Schleiermacher  or  the  Pentecostals.  As  Ford  Lewis  Battles  has  demon-
strated,  Calvin's  theology  represents  a  via  media  approach  between  the  extremes 
of  Roman  Catholicism  on  the right  and  the  Anabaptists  and  Libertines  on  the  left8. 
Even  if  one  does  not  concur  with  Battles'  thesis,  it  is  generally  agreed  that  Calvin 
would  not  countenance  any  understanding  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  which  ran 
counter  to the objective  revelation  we  have  in  Christ  and  the  Word. 

5.  Calvin  was  no  mystic,  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word,  but  there  are  mystical 
strains  in  his  thought.  He  not  only  taught  a  mystical  union  (unio  mystica)  with 
Christ9,  but  spoke  frequently  in  a  mystical  fashion.  For  example,  it  is  «the  secret 
working  (arcana  efficacia)  of  the  Spirit  by  which  we  come  to  enjoy  Christ  and  all 
his  benefits»10. 

6.  Therefore,  we  should  not  be  too  surprised  to  discover  that  Calvin  speaks 
again  and  again  of  the  Spirit  as  governing,  guiding,  and  leading  the  Christian  in 
experiential  ways  that  are  apparently  independent  of  any  concrete  scriptural  teach-
ing -  though  not,  it must  be  added,  in  any  way  contradictory  to  it. As  Werner  Kru-
sche  wams,  «There  is  no  doubt  that  Calvin  -  and  rightly  so  -  had  no  isolated  in-
terest  in  a  <leading>  of  the  Holy  Spirit  as  if  this  were  the  peculiar  and  decisive 
thing  that  can  be  said  of  what  today  is  described  as <the reality  of  the  Holy  Spiritx 
For  him  the  directio  Spiritus  (direction  of  the  Spirit)  belongs  constantly  together 
with  God's  command,  instruction,  and  warning  in the  Holy  Scripture»11. 

See Inst. III. 1.2-3  and III.2.24. 

6 
7  Milner, Doctrine  130. Cf.  Quistorp, Lehre  130. 
8 

Ford  Lewis  Battles,  Calculus  Fidei  -  Some  Ruminations  on  the  Structure  of  Calvin's 
Theology,  in:  Calvinus  Ecclesiae  Doctor,  ed.  Wilhelm  H.  Neuser,  Kampen  1979. 
Battles'  thesis  has  been  picked  up  and  developed  in  other  contexts  by  Donald  K. 
McKim,  John  Calvin,  a  Theologian  for  an  Age  of  Limits,  in:  Readings  in  Calvin's 
Theology, ed. D. McKim, Grand Rapids  1984, 292ff;  and Richard Gamble, Word  80f. 
Long  before  Battles'  monograph,  theologians  like  Walter Kreck  were  affirming  much 
the same thesis: «Calvin, like the Reformation  in general, battled on two fronts,  against 
Rome  and  against  the  enthusiasts  (Schwärmer)»,  Walter  Kreck,  Wort  und  Geist  bei 
Calvin,  in: Festschrift  für  Günther  Dehn zum 75. Geburtstag, ed. Wilhelm  Schneemel-
cher, Neukirchen  1957, 178. Note: All translations from the German are mine. 
Institutes  III.2.24  and  111.11.10,  «Almost  all  of  the  more  recent  Calvin  scholars  are 
united  in  the  conviction  that  a  central  teaching  for  Calvin  was  the  communio  cum 
Christo  or  the  insitio  in  Christum  whose  light  streams  through  every  aspect  of  his 
theology,  including  his pneumatology»,  Quistorp, Lehre  133. The pioneering  effort  in 
this  regard  is  W.  Kolfliaus'  Christusgemeinschaft  bei  Johannes  Calvin,  Neukirchen 
1939 [abbr.: Kolfhaus,  Christusgemeinschaft]. 
Institutes III. 1.1. 

10 
11  Krusche, Wirken 294. 

9 

162 

There  is massive  evidence  which  indicates  that  in Calvin's  theology  the Holy 
Spirit  plays  a  role  that  is  far  more  mystical,  experiential,  and  individual  than  is 
recognized  by  most  Calvin  scholars.  Willem  Balke,  at  the  International  Calvin 
Congress in Amsterdam  in  1978, presented a paper on «The Word of God and Ex-
perientia»12  and  showed  the  significant  place  of  experience  in  Calvin's  theology, 
but  in view  of  the evidence  I  shall present, his conclusions  seem  to me to be too 
cautious and conservative. 

7. To  State my thesis  positively,  the abundant  references  in  Calvin's  writings 
to the governing and guiding work of the Spirit suggest that although the concrete 
truths  and  injunctions  of  Scripture  may  be  implied  or  understood  and  although 
Christ  is always  the model  (exemplar)  for  our  lives13, Calvin  submits  that  we are 
given  not  only  faith  and  assurance  by  the  Holy  Spirit  but  also  both  general  and 
specific  wisdom  and  direction  for  our lives  quite  apart  from  any explicit  Instruc(cid:173)
tion  in the Scriptures or preaching of the gospel. In short, the Spirit  at times gives 
seemingly independent and secret guidance. The Spirit gives a sort of  supraration(cid:173)
al insight and understanding. 

8. What we have here is an aspect of the doctrine of sanctification.  To be gov-
erned by God's Spirit means to be reformed  and transformed  by God with the goal 
that Christ may be formed  in us, i.e., by the renewal of the image of God. 

//. Zur Sache -  To the Matter at Hand 

A. The Terminology 

Calvin's  preferred  terms  in  describing  this  special,  inner  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
are the verbs  used  in the title of this paper:  «govern»  (guberno  or Fr.  gouvernez) 
and «guide»  (duco or dirigo Fr. conduire)  and their nominative counterparts, «go-
vernance»  (gubernatio)  and  «guide»  (dux, Fr.  conduite)  or  «guidance»  (directio). 
Almost  as  frequent,  however,  is  the  verb  «rule»  (rego,  which  means  «guide»  as 
well as «rule»; Fr. moderer). 

A  prime  illustration  is  found  in  two  passages  in  II.3.10  of  the  «Institutes»: 
«The Lord  by his Spirit directs, bends, and governs  our heart14 and reigns in 

Willem Balke,  The  Word  of  God  and  Experientia,  in:  Calvinus  Ecclesiae  Doctor,  ed. 
W. H. Neuser, Kampen  1979,  19ff. 
Institutes  III.6.3:  «Christ,  through  whom  we return  into  favor  with  God,  has  been  set 
before  us as an example whose pattern  (exemplar) we ought to express in our life.»  Cf. 
a similar assertion in a sermon on Ephesians 4:23-26, «... our Lord lesus Christ is given 
us for an example and pattern (pour example et patron)...»  (CO 51, 623). 
«...  suo  Spiritu  cor  nostrum  dirigire,  flectere,  moderari.»  Note:  Italic  here  and  in  the 
following  quotations are mine. 

163 

it as his possession  ... It  is obviously  the privilege  of  the elect  that,  regenerated 
through  the Spirit  of  God,  they  are  moved  and  governed  by  his 

leading»15. 

From  the Geneva  Catechism: 

After  defining  repentance  as  the  hatred  of  sin  and  the  love  of  righteousness, 
Calvin  adds,  «these  things  lead  us  to  denial  of  seif  and  mortification  of  the 
flesh,  so that  we  yield  ourselves  to be  ruled  by  the  Spirit  ofGod,  and  bring  all 
the  actions  of  our  life  into  obedience  to  the  divine  will»16.  Concerning 
«wicked  men  and  devils»,  «Although  God  does  not  govern  them  by  his  Spirit, 
yet  he  checks  them  by  his power,  as with  a bridle  ...»17. 

From  the  commentaries: 

«God  is  present  with  his  elect,  whom  he  governs  by  the  special  grace  of  his 
Spirit»,s.  The  sum  of  it  (the  mortification  of  the  flesh  and  newness  of  life)  ap-
pears  from  this,  that  we  are  God's  children,  when  his  Spirit 
rulesimoderatur) 
and  governs  our 

life»19. 

From  the  sermons: 

«When  we pray  for  God  to guide  (conduise)  and  govern  us  by  his  Spirit  in  that 
enterprise,  people  cannot  take  offense  at  what  has  been  said  openly  with  char-
ity»20.  «He  (Christ)  is  given  to  us  for  our  sanctification,  in  order  that  we 
should  be  governed  by  his  Spirit»21. 

From  his polemical  writings: 

«Scripture  teaches  that  none  but  the  elect  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  What 
Spirit?»22 
rectitude  can  there  be  in  man  apart  from  the  leading  of  the  Holy 
And  in  his  preface  to  his  tract  against  the  Anabaptists  addressed  to  the  minis-
ters  in  Neuchätel:  «May  He  (the  Lord)  always  guide  you  by  his  Spirit  that  by 

15 

«...  ipsius  ductu  agantur  ac  gubernentur.»  Later  in  this  section  Calvin  cites  John  6:44 
and  comments:  «One  may  ... conclude  from  John's  words  that  the  hearts  of  the  pious 
are  so  effectively  governed  by  God  (sie  efficacitur  gubernari  divinitus  est)  that  they 
follow  him  with  unwavering  affection.»  Calvin  occasionally  uses  the  same  sorts  of 
phrases with God rather than the Holy  Spirit as the subjeet  of the action, e.g., «... none 
of  us  remains  settled  in  his  opinion  from  morning  to  night  unless  he  is  governed  by 
God. When we hear the gospel preached, then, we must have God's Spirit to guide and 
govern  us, so that we may thoroughly  embrace our Lord Jesus Christ and by him have 
access to the Father», Sermon No. 14 on Eph. 2:16-19  (CO 51, 418), underlining mine. 
«Insofar  as  we  are  in  the  world,  let  us  recognize  that  God  governs  us  here,  that  he 
shows us the road in order that we might be not errant pilgrims who ramble about  from 
pillar to post, but that we might be led as ifby  his hand», Sermon No.  1 on Deut. 4:44-
5:3 (CO 26, 246), Italic mine. 

16  Q.  128 (OS II, 96). 
17  Q. 28 (OS II, 58). 
18  Comm. Gen. 21:20 (CO 23, 305). 
19  Comm.  1  John 3:23 (CO 50, 345). 
20 
21 
22  The Eternal Predestination of God, translated by J. K. S. Reid, London  1961, 134. 

Sermon No.  11 on Deut. 5:20 (CO 26, 367). 
Sermon No. 29 on Eph. 4:20-24 (CO 51, 613). 

164 

means  of  your  ministry  you  might  serve  Him  to  His  honor  as  well  as  to  the 
salvation  of  His  poor  people»23. 

Finally,  from  his  prayers: 

«... that  thou  mayest  govern  us  according 
to  thy  will,  and  so  rule  all  our  affec-
tions  by  thy  Spirit,  that  we  may  through  the  whole  of  our  life  strive  to  glorify 
thy  name  ...»24.  «Rule  us  by  the  Spirit,  that  we  may  meekly  and  obediently 
submit  to thee  ...»25. 

This  is  only  a  sampling;  such  illustrations  could  be  multiplied  many  times  over. 
They  are  found 
in  the  «Institutes», 
commentaries,  and  sermons26. 

in  all  of  Calvin's  writings,  particularly 

B.  One  Meaning  -  A  Special  Aspect  of  Sanctification 

Already,  in  this  brief  sampling,  one  motif  is  evident.  The  governing,  guiding,  and 
ruling  work  of  the  Spirit  in  the  life  of  the  believer  is  principally  an  aspect  of  the 
doctrine  of  sanctification.  In  the  passages  cited  thus  far  the  role  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
is  similar  to  that  of  the  «secret»  or  «inward»  testimony  of  the  Spirit  relative  to  the 
authentication  of  the  Scriptures  as  the  Word  of  God27.  However,  in  all  the  cases 
cited  above,  this  internal,  secret  work  of  the  Spirit  is  different.  It  does  not  relate 
directly  either  to the  self-authentication  of  Scripture  or  its  understanding,  although 
it  comes  close  to  the  latter  at times.  Nor  does  it relate  to  the  origin  of  faith,  which 
is  «the principal  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit»28. 

In  these  instances  the  special  role  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  rather  that  of  imple-
menting  and  assisting  the  life-long  process  of  mortification  and  vivification, 
which  is  the  way  Calvin  describes  conversion  or  repentance29.  More  specifically, 
as  we  have  seen,  this  special  work  of  the  Spirit  helps  us  to  obey  God's  will  and 
thereby  glorify  him.  Since  God's  will  for  our  lives  is  revealed  in  his  law30,  one 
might  conclude  -  as  does  Werner  Krusche  -  that  «the  obedience,  to  which  the 

23  Treatises  Against  the  Anabaptists  and  Against  the  Libertines,  translated  by  Benjamin 

24 

25 
26 

27 
28 

29 

30 

Wirt Farley, Grand Rapids  1982, 18. 
Prayer  following  the  exposition  of  Arnos  4:12,  from  Devotions  and  Prayers  of  John 
Calvin, compiled by Charles E. Edwards, Grand Rapids  1954, 45. 
Following the exposition of Hosea 5:1, ibid. 17. 
I have not examined  the correspondence  for  such phrases, but I suspect that there, too, 
such exhortations might be found. 
Institutes 1.7.4. Cf. 1.7.5. 
Inst. III. 1.4. Cf.  III.2.8, 35, 39. It is by «the  secret energy  (efficacia)  of the Spirit» that 
«we come to enjoy  Christ and all his benefits», Inst. III. 1.1. 
For Calvin, conversion  and repentance  are almost identical.  «The whole of  conversion 
to God is understood under the term <repentance>, and faith  is not the least part of con(cid:173)
version», Inst. III.3.5. Cf.  Heidelberg Catechism, Q. 88. 
«The precepts  of  the  law  ... comprehend  the  will  of  God»  (Inst. 1.17.2). «God  has re(cid:173)
vealed his will in the law» (Inst. II.8.59, cf. II.8.5). 

165 

Holy  Spirit  frees  (us)  is  ...  obedience  vis-ä-vis  (gegenüber)  God's  righteousness, 
i.e., vis-ä-vis the law of God»31. 

This  is  a  valid  assertion,  one  which  could  be  further  validated  by  evidence 
Krusche does not cite. For example, in a sermon on Ephesians 2:8-10, Calvin  says 
that God must not only teach us what is good through the Scriptures, but must also 
«reform  us  and  so  guide  and  govern  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit  that  there  may  be 
agreement  (accord)  between  our  life  and  his  law»32.  He  concludes  this  sermon 
with the prayer: May God «so uphold us and govern us by his Holy Spirit that our 
whole endeavor may be nothing eise than to frame our life after his only law»33. 

But there is more to this guidance and governance  of the Spirit than  simply a 
general desire to be obedient to God's will as revealed  in the law. The Holy Spirit 
is more than an inspirer and enabler. To be guided, governed, and led by the Spirit 
in this context implies receiving  special guidance, insight, and strength. All Chris(cid:173)
tians  receive  the  Holy  Spirit  from  Christ,  but  there  are  degrees  of  empowering. 
The presence  of  the Spirit  in the lives  of  Christians  is not  a static thing. For Cal(cid:173)
vin, the intensity  or nature of the Spirit's guidance may vary according  to the spe(cid:173)
cific needs of a given  Situation. 

We  tend,  for  example,  to  be  fickle,  unstable,  and  opinionated,  says  Calvin, 
unless  we  are  «governed  by  God»  and  «have  God's  Spirit  to  guide  and  govern 
us»34.  The  implication  is  that  for  us  to  maintain  stability  in  the  Christian  life,  a 
constant,  ever-renewing  guidance  of  the Spirit  is necessary.  Hence  we  «must  ask 
of  the  Lord  the  Spirit  of  discretion  and  fortitude  and  with  his  direction  we  shall 
know  what  is expedient,  and  boldly  carry  through  what  we  are  sure  is  laid  upon 
us»33. 

This  kind  of  wisdom  and  discretion  is  not  a  permanent  possession.  This  is 
why we constantly need to look to the Lord for the guidance of the Spirit. We see 
this  in  the  case  of  David,  who  in  Psalm  143:10  asks,  «Let  thy  good  Spirit  lead 
me ...». Calvin comments: David «desires the guidance of the Spirit, not merely as 
he enlightens our minds, but as he effectively  influences  the consent of our hearts, 
and  as  it  were  leads  us  by  the  hand  ...  We  should  always  seek  the  guidance  of 
God's Spirit to keep them (passions) in moderation»36. 

The reason  we need  this constant  guidance  and  governing  of  the Spirit  is be-
cause no Christian knows the fullness  of the Spirit, for Christ has only «partly en-
lightened us already by his Holy Spirit». Hence we are to pray that «it may please 
him  to  increase  his  grace  in  us  more  and  more  until  he  has  communicated  it 

31  Krusche, Wirken 228. In  Support of this contention Krusche  cites Comm. on Hosea 

14:5; Hom. 1  Sam. 10:6; Inst. II.2.8; and Comm. John 8:32. 

32  Sermon No. 11  on Ephesians (CO 51, 384). 
33  The prayer is not included in the Calvini Opera but is found in the English translation 
by Arthur Golding (revised): John Calvin's Sermons on Ephesians, Edinburgh/Carlisle, 
Pa. 1973/5,  168. 

34  Sermon No. 14 on Eph. 2:16-19 (CO 51, 418). 
35  Comm. on Harmony of the Gospels, on Mt. 10:32 (CO 45, 291). 
36  Comm. Ps. 143:10 (CO 32, 683). 

166 

wholly  to us, and  in the meantime  to  uphold  us and  govern  us by his  Holy  Spir(cid:173)
it ,..»37. 

It is not only  our tendency  toward  instability  and  our passions  which  need to 
be checked by the rule of the Spirit; our reason  also «is overwhelmed  by so many 
forms  of deceptions, is subject to so many errors ..., is caught in so many  difficul-
ties, that  it is far  from  directing  us  aright». Accordingly,  we need  «continued  di-
rection  at  every  moment».  This  is  why  we  turn  «to  the  Holy  Spirit  who  <knows 
that all the thoughts of the wise are futile>  (1 Cor. 3:20; cf.  Ps. 94:11)  ...»38. 

Another aspect of sanctification  which Calvin highlights  with the use of these 
termini technici  is one that may well be autobiographical  in character.  In his own 
conversion  experience  he  was  «subdued  to  teachableness  (ad  docilitatem)»39. 
Likewise,  we too tend  to be  arrogant  and  «would  sooner  be  beaten  down  by  the 
lashes of  adversity  than be corrected,  if he (the Lord) did not by his Spirit render 
us teachable»40. As a result, in his prayers  Calvin would  occasionally  pray:  «Rule 
us by thy Spirit, that we may meekly and obediently  submit to thee, and with such 
teachableness that we may become wise ...»41. 

Thus  the  whole  life  of  sanctification  is  one  of  being  continually  led  and 
renewed by the Spirit and thereby  gradually restored in the image  of God. This is 
realized  in particular  when  we celebrate the  sabbath  day  according  to  its primary 
purpose, viz., «to cease  from  our own works, that the Lord may work in us»42. In 
response to the question, «How is that done?» Calvin answers, «By mortifying  the 
flesh,  that is, renouncing  our own nature, so that God may govern  us by his  Spir(cid:173)
it»43.  Calvin  then  explains  that this  is  something  that  is not  done  only  one  day a 
week, but «is to be done continually  ... all our life»44. 

C. Other Illustrations of Special Guidance 

The necessity of such continual guidance and direction of the Spirit was necessary 
not only  for  David  and the saints of the old covenant  as well  as Christians  in our 
time;  it  was  also  necessary  for  the  apostle  Paul  who  relied  on  the  leading  of  the 
Spirit  in his missionary journeys  and  activities. With  this  we move from  the role 

37 
38 
39 
40 
41 

Prayer at the conclusion of Sermon No. 11 on Eph. 2:8-10, 168. 
Inst. II.2.25. 
Preface to the commentary on the Psalms (CO 31, 21). 
«nisi spiritu suo nos ad eam docilitatem  componeret», Inst. II.5.13. 
Prayer following  the exposition  of Hosea 5:1, p.  17. Cf.  prayer following  exposition of 
Joel  2:1  (p.  33):  «Grant  that  ...  we  may  surrender  ourselves  to  thee  and  become  so 
teachable  and  submissive  that  wherever  thou  guidest  by thy  Spirit  thou  mayest  follow 
us with every blessing.» 

42  Geneva  Catechism,  Q.  172 (OS II,  102). Cf.  Inst. II.8.29. Concerning  the  fourth  com-
mandment:  «First,  we  are  to  meditate  throughout  life  on  an  everlasting  Sabbath  rest 
from  all our works, that the Lord may work in us through his Spirit.» 
Ibid., Q.  173 (OS II, 102). 
Ibid., Q. 174 (OS II, 103). 

43 
44 

167 

of  the  Spirit  in  sanctification,  particularly  repentance  as  a  life-long  activity,  to 
special acts of guidance by the Spirit in daily affairs  and crucial life decisions. 

«There  is no  doubt»,  says  Calvin,  «that  he himself  (Paul)  was encouraged  in 
no  ordinary  way  to  carry  on  when  he  knew  that he  had  the  Spirit  of  God  as  the 
guide  of  his  life  and  actions.»  Hence, he  «did  not  teach  anywhere  except  by  the 
guidance (manuducente)  of the Spirit  ...»45. Moreover, because he had such wide(cid:173)
ranging  responsibilities  «he  needed  the  extraordinary  direction  (singulari  direc-
tione) of the Spirit»46. 

Other illustrations  of  an extraordinary  leading  of  the Spirit  Calvin  sees in the 
gospel story of the woman who had suffered  from  a hemorrhage  for twelve years. 
What  led  her  to believe  that  by  touching  Christ's  garment  she  would  be  healed? 
Calvin  concludes that  such  a rash  act was due to «a unique prompting  (singularis 
impulsus)  of  the  Holy  Spirit». He hastens  to  add that  such  a case  «should  not be 
forced  into a general rule»47. Yet, in a variety of contexts he suggests that it is not 
all that unusual for the Spirit to move a believer to do some unusual thing. 

Another  illustration  is  «the  unique  and  extraordinary  movement  of  the  Spir(cid:173)
it»48 in the case of the cripple in Lystra who was healed by Paul. Calvin notes that 
«God does not command us to hope for anything we like on the spot», yet God by 
this  special  working  of  his  Spirit  «prepared  the  cripple's  mind  beforehand  and 
made him capable of this new experience». Again, Calvin  shows his conservatism 
by cautioning  that incidents  «like this must not be made into a common  rule», al-
though all of God's children  «are endowed with the Spirit of adoption»49. 

Such  cautions  notwithstanding,  Calvin  frequently  points  to  a  more  common 
phenomenon  in  regard  to  the  leading  and  guidance  of  the  Spirit,  i.e.,  that  all 
believers can anticipate -  providing  they  seek God's help with the right attitude  -
a  special  guidance  of  the  Spirit  in  making  various  kinds  of judgments  and  deci(cid:173)
sions. Accordingly,  when David prays, «teach me that I may do thy will», Calvin 
interprets  this  request  as  for  something  far  more  important  than  seeking  deliv-
erance, «but what is of  still greater importance, viz., the guidance of God's  Spirit, 
that  he  might  not  deviate  to  the  right  hand  or  the  left,  but  be  kept  in  the  part  of 
rectitude»50. 

We have another model in Daniel who «was directed by God's Spirit» to make 
prudent requests. At crucial times he «did not speak rashly or of his own will, but 
by the  impulse  (instinctu)  of  the  Holy  Spirit».  «He  would  not  have  spoken  thus, 
except under the guidance and direction (duce et magistro) of the Spirit»51. 

45  Comm. Acts 16:6 (CO 48, 373). 
46 

Ibid. In a similar vein Calvin sometimes likens stubborn, unruly human nature to wild 
horses. His corresponding prescription is for us to be «like quiet horses (and) let our-
selves be turned and guided by his (God's) hand», Comm. Acts 9:5 (CO 48, 202). 

47  Comm. Mt. 9:20 (CO 45, 257). 
48  Comm. Acts 14:9 (CO 48, 321). 
49 
50  Comm. Ps. 143:10 (CO 32, 683). 
51  Comm. Daniel 1:11 (CO 40, 549). 

Ibid. 

168 

In  this  passage  we  encounter  for  the  first  time  another  expression  which  be-
comes  a  veritable  terminus  technicus  in  Calvin's  writings,  particularly  the com-
mentaries  and  sermons,  viz., «by a  secret  impulse  of the  Spirit/God  (arcano  spiri-
tus/Dei  instinctu)».  Benjamin  Milner  has  made  a  special  study  of  this  term  and 
points  out  that  it  is  used  in  two  quite  different  contexts,  viz., in  connection  with 
both  the godly  and ungodly52.  Even  in the case  of the former,  «the  most  important 
references  to the <secret  impulse>  are those  instances  in  which  it seems to take the 
place  of,  or  to  obviate  the  need  for,  objective  revelation»53.  This  is  basically  the 
same  point  I have  been  making  in regard  to the corollary  notion  of being  governed 
and  guided  by the  Spirit. 

Milner  provides  many  illustrations  to  confirm  his  point.  Here,  one  must  suf-
fice.  In  commenting  on  the  sudden  recognition  of  the  risen  Lord  by  the  Emmaus 
disciples, Calvin  observes: 

Their  recognition  of Christ  led the disciples  to a lively  perception  (vivo  sensu) 
of  the  secret  and hidden  grace  of  the  Spirit  which  he  had  formerly  bestowed 
upon  them.  For God  sometimes  works  upon  his people  in  such  a manner  that 
for  a  time  they  are not  aware  of  the power  of  the  Spirit  (of  which,  however, 
they  are not  destitute),  or  at  least  that  they  do not  recognize  (agnoscat)  it dis-
tinctly, but only  perceive  (sentiant)  it by a secret  impulse54. 

Here  we  must  rest  our  case,  although  much  more  evidence  could  be  brought  to 
bear  on  the  thesis  that  the  «objective»  Calvin  turns  out  to  be  remarkably  subjec-
tive  in  this  particular  aspect  of  his  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  At  times  he  even 
seems  to come  dangerously  close to the very  enthusiasts  (Schwärmer)  whom  he so 
vigorously  attacks  and  refutes55.  Yet,  in  our  enthusiasm  -  or  alarm,  as  the  case 
may  be -  in regard  to this  discovery,  we  should  keep  in mind  certain  basic  princi-
ples  which  are  crucial  to  a proper  understanding  of  Calvin's  doctrine  of  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

///.  Word  and  Spirit  -  No New  Revelations 

In  all of  the  illustrations  cited  above  Calvin  never  suggests  that  anything  we  are 
moved  or led to do by the Spirit  contradicts  or undercuts  the revelation  we have  in 

52  Milner, Doctrine, appendix,  197ff. 
53 

Ibid.,  198. «In general, then,  Calvin  adduces  this  <secret  impulse  of the Spirit> to au-
thenticate  any thought,  speech  or action  of  the godly  which  lacks  objective  Warrant, 
i.e., objective expression of the divine will -  ordinatio Dei», ibid. 199f. 

54  Comm. Lk. 24:32 (CO 45, 809). In the case of the ungodly, however, when directed by 
a secret impulse of God (not the Spirit), they do so unconsciously  and unwillingly. See 
Milner, Doctrine 200f. 

55  Krusche  astutely  observes  that  Calvin,  despite  his  close  identification  of  Word  and 
Spirit,  is not caught  up (befangen)  in an anti-enthusiast  complex  so that he refuses  to 
entertain  any ideas of a «leading» of the Holy  Spirit, Krusche, Wirken  290. However, 
the conclusions Krusche draws on the following  page are unduly cautious and fail to do 
justice to the seemingly radical character of some of Calvin's utterances. 

169 

Jesus  Christ  and  the  written  Word.  However  secretly,  freely,  or  independently  the 
Spirit  may  operate  in  the  lives  of  believers,  that  wisdom  or  counsel  is  consistent 
with  the  revealed  Word.  As  Calvin  wams  in  his  tractate  against  the  Libertines, 
«We  choke  out the  light  of  God's  Spirit  if  we  cut  ourselves  off  from  his  Word»56. 
To  be  governed  and  guided  by  the  Spirit  may  mean  new  insights,  deeper  un-
derstanding,  empowerment,  and  concrete  applications  or  directions  for  our  lives, 
but  no  new  revelations!  A  key  passage  here  is  found  in  his  commentary  on  John 
14:26: 

God  teaches  in  two  ways.  He  sounds  in  our  ears  by  the  mouths  of  men  and  he 
addresses  us  inwardly  by  his  Spirit.  Sometimes  he  does  this  simultaneously, 
sometimes  at different  times, as  it  seems  appropriate  to  him57. 

All  this  seeming  subjectivity  notwithstanding,  Calvin's  fundamental  principle 
concerning  the  relation  of  Word  and  Spirit  Stands  firm,  viz.,  «the  Spirit  wills  to  be 
coupled  (coniunctus)  with  God's  Word  by  an  indissoluble  bond  (individuo  ne-
xu)  ... We  are  to  expect  nothing  more  from  his  (Christ's)  Spirit  than  that  he  will  il-
lumine  our minds  to perceive  the truth  of  his  teaching»58. 

IV.  Conclusion 

One  may  interpret  the  above  material  in various  ways,  but  there  is no  denying  that 
it  represents  a  significant  motif  in  Calvin's  theology  of  the  Spirit.  This  is  by  no 
means  a  peripheral  or  passing  interest  of  Calvin's.  These  phrases  are  found  more 
frequently  in  some  writings  than  others,  but  they  are  almost  universal  in  the  Cal-
vinian  corpus.  If  there  is  any  development  at  all,  it  might  be  in  a  more  frequent 
usage  of  this  terminology  in  his  later  writings59.  Moreover,  one  might  also  inves-
tigate  the  role  of  the  Spirit  in  governing  and  guiding  the  church,  although  such 
references  are  less  frequent60. 

56  Treatises  Against  the  Anabaptists  and  Against  the  Libertines,  pp.  224-5. A  few  lines 
later Calvin adds: «Let us hold, I say, to the pure and piain Word of God, where He has 
clearly  revealed  his  will  to us. And  let us pray  that  by  his  Holy  Spirit  He will want  to 
implant it in our hearts, which is his true office», 225. 

57  CO 47, 334. 
58 

Institutes  IV.8.13. Cf.  1.9.3:  «For by a kind  of mutual bond  (mutuo nexu)  the Lord has 
joined together the certainty  of his Word and of his Spirit so that the perfect  religion of 
the Word may abide in our minds when the Spirit, who causes us to contemplate  God's 
face,  shines; and that we in tum may embrace the Spirit with no fear  of being  deceived 
when we recognize him in his own image, namely, in the Word.» 

59  There  are  very  few  references  of  this  type  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Institutes  (1536) 
and in his first  Catechism  (1537/8), but they are not totally  lacking even here. It may be 
significant  that  there  are relatively  few  references  to the  governing  and  guiding  of  the 
Spirit in Calvin's first  commentary, viz., Romans, but that commentary  underwent  sev-
eral revisions, so Calvin could have added such passages later. 
See  Institutes  IV.19.6;  IV.8.11;  and  «Reply  to  Sadolet»,  in  Calvin:  Theological  Trea(cid:173)
tises, 229. On the role of the Spirit in church Councils, see IV.9.11. 

60 

170 

If,  then, this is such  an important theme -  or, at least,  subtheme -  in  Calvin's 
doctrine  of  the  Spirit,  how  can  we  account  for  this  stränge  lacuna?  For  approxi-
mately 60 years Calvin scholars have been describing Calvin as «the theologian of 
the  Holy  Spirit»,  and  yet,  with  one  exception  (Werner  Krusche)  this  theme  as 
been either overlooked  or avoided. Granted,  it is nowhere developed as a separate 
locus, but the same could be said of the incidental and almost isolated reference to 
the mystical  union  of the believer with  Christ;  and yet that topic has been  picked 
up  and  developed  in  most  recent  Standard  Calvin  studies  and  in  a  sizable  mono-
graph by W. Kolfhaus61. 

In earlier studies this Omission could be attributed to the lack of interest in the 
Holy  Spirit,  although  the  Puritans  and  Abraham  Kuyper  wrote  voluminously  on 
that theme62. With  the  outburst  of  Calvin  studies  inspired  by  Barth  and  Brunner, 
particularly  the former,  since the  1930s, one might have anticipated  some interest 
in this  theme, but  the  Christocentric  emphasis  of  dialectical  or  Neo-Reformation 
theology may account for an undue caution in regard to the work of the Holy Spir(cid:173)
it. 

One of  the main reasons  for  the lack of interest  in or aversion to this theme  -
or a reluctance to acknowledge  its significance  -  is the fear  of mysticism63,  or, in 
our  own  time,  Neo-Pentecostalism.  In  view  of  excesses  in  both  these  traditions 
and  of  the  theology  of  Schleiermacher  which  influences  so  much  contemporary 
theology,  such  concerns  are justified,  but  they  do  not  account  for  the  stränge  si-
lence concerning  a legitimate biblical  motif  which  Calvin  dared  to deal  with  in a 
concrete and creative fashion64.  We who admire  the Genevan  reformer  should do 
no less. 

Prof. Dr. I. John Hesselink, Western Theological  Seminary, 86 East Twelfth  Street, Holland, 
MI 49423, USA 

61  Kolfhaus,  Christusgemeinschaft. 
62  Abraham  Kuyper,  Doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  Grand  Rapids  1946, (first  appeared  in 

63 

1900). 
See, for example, Kolfhaus,  Christusgemeinschaft  125ff,  and van der Linde, Leer 118-
132: «De Heilige Geest en de wedergeboorte». 

64  As Alexandre  Ganozcy  points  out  in  his  magisterial  work,  Ecclesia  Ministrans,  Die(cid:173)

nende Kirche und kirchlicher  Dienst bei Calvin, Freiburg  1968, 70: «In describing  this 
spiritual  Operation  in the  lives  of  the justified,  Calivin  uses exclusively  biblical terms: 
regeneration, sanctification,  new creation, restoration, the re-formation  (Neugestaltung) 
of the image of God ...» -  and, one might add, the leading or guidance of the Spirit. 

171 

