ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 41 (2014), 1–33

Remembering Jerome and

Forgetting Zwingli

The Zurich Latin Bible of 1543 and

the Establishment of Heinrich

Bullinger’s Church 1

Bruce Gordon

In early 1543, as relations between Swiss and German Protestants
reached their nadir, the Zurich printer and publisher Christoph
Froschauer produced a folio Latin Old Testament, Apocrypha, and
New Testament.2 This handsome volume was not an edition of the
Vulgate, which was by no means despised by Reformed Protestants

1 The following is a reworked and extended version of a lecture delivered in the
theological faculty of Zurich University on the occasion of my receiving an honorary
doctorate in April 2012. I wish to express my most heartfelt gratitude to the members of
the faculty for this honour. In particular I wish to thank Peter Opitz, Christian Moser,
and Christoph Uehlinger, the Dean. I am also grateful to the members of the audience,
whose questions and observations I have tried to accommodate in the revisions. Re-
search for this paper was carried out with the support of the Arts and Humanities
Research Council of the United Kingdom and by research grants from Yale University. I
am grateful to the Council and the University for their generosity. I wish also to thank
Matthew McLean, Jamie Dunn, and Brad Holden for their assistance.

2 Biblia sacrosancta testamenti veteris et novi e sacra Hebraeorum lingua Graeco-
rumque fontibus, consultis simul orthodoxis interpretibus religiosissime translata in
sermonem Latinum [...], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer, 1543 (Christian Moser, Theo-
dor Bibliander [1505–1564]: Annotierte Bibliographie der gedruckten Werke, Zurich
2009 [Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 27], no. B–8.1a/b). On Froschauer
the standard work remains Paul Leemann van Elck, Die Offizin Froschauer: Zürichs
berühmte Druckerei im 16. Jahrhundert, Zurich 1940.

2

Bruce Gordon

and was frequently printed in Basel and Zurich.3 The Biblia sa-
crosanta, rather, was a new translation of the Old Testament and
the Apocrypha together with a revision of Erasmus’ 1535 Novum
Testamentum.4 Although the print life of the Zurich Bible was rela-
tively brief, the translation was widely admired and occupied an
important place in the continuing efforts of Protestants to render
scripture into Latin for the use of scholars, clergy, and educated
laity.5

Yet, as the greatest intellectual achievement of the Zurich church
by the early 1540s, there was something curious about the Latin
Bible with its extensive prefaces and apparati. Searching through
the prefatorial material yields no mention of the most prominent
figure of the Zurich reformation, Huldrych Zwingli. The cause of
this omission lies with the project of Heinrich Bullinger to rebuild
the Zurich church after the disastrous defeat at Kappel in 1531.6
The new Bible was to be the supreme expression of a Reformed
order defined by piety, learning, moderation, and institutional in-
tegrity. To make this change be possible, a subtle break with the

3 See Urs B. Leu, The Book- and Reading-Culture in Basle and Zurich During the
Sixteenth Century, in: Malcolm Walsby and Graeme Kemp (eds.), The Book Triumph-
ant: Print in Transition in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries, Leiden 2011 (Li-
brary of the Written Word 15), 295–319.

4 The literature on the Zurich Latin Bible is limited. See Claire Gantet, La Religion
et ses mots: La Bible latine de Zurich (1543) entre la tradition et l’innovation, in:
Zwingliana 23 (1996), 143–167.

5 Josef Eskhult, Latin Bible Translations in the Protestant Reformation: Historical
Contexts, Philological Justification, and the Impact of Classical Rhetoric on the Con-
ception of Translation Methods,
in: Bruce Gordon and Matthew McLean (eds.),
Shaping the Bible in the Reformation: Books, Scholars and Their Readers in the Six-
teenth Century, Leiden 2012 (Library of the Written Word 20), 167–185; Bruce Gor-
don, The Authority of Antiquity: England and the Protestant Latin Bible, in: The Re-
ception of Continental Reformation in Britain, ed. Polly Ha and Patrick Collinson,
Oxford 2010 (Proceedings of the British Academy 164), 1–22.

6 Heinrich Bullinger’s building of the church in Zurich is examined in Hans Ulrich
Bächtold, Heinrich Bullinger vor dem Rat: Zur Gestaltung und Verwaltung des Zürcher
Staatswesens in den Jahren 1531 bis 1575, Bern 1982 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Refor-
mationsgeschichte 12); Bruce Gordon, Clerical Discipline and the Rural Reformation:
The Synod in Zurich 1532–1574, Bern 1992 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsge-
schichte 16); Pamela Biel, Doorkeepers at the House of Righteousness: Heinrich Bullin-
ger and the Zurich Clergy 1535–1575, Bern 1991 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformations-
geschichte 15). For the »crisis« of the 1530s, see J. Wayne Baker, Church, State, and
Dissent: The Crisis of the Swiss Reformation, 1531–1536, in: Church History 57
(1988), 107–120.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

3

past was essential. The intentional eclipsing of Zwingli was not a
crude denunciation of a fallen leader. In the polemical wars with
Lutherans the Zurichers would continue to defend robustly their
first reformer. In 1536 the letters of Zwingli and Oecolampadius
were printed by Thomas Platter in Basel, and the text was prepared
by the Zurich scholar Theodor Bibliander.7 Likewise, translations
of Zwingli’s last works by Leo Jud appeared in Zurich during the
1530s.

On the whole, however, Zwingli was not mourned in public.8
Unlike accounts of the peaceful end of Martin Luther, represented
by his death mask, or John Calvin, surrounded by his friends,
Zwingli had not died well. He had fallen in a nighttime raid, sword
in hand, leading a military campaign many in his city had not
wanted. His sudden death and the humiliation of Zurich had near-
ly led to the reversal of the reformation in the city. Zwingli would
have to be grieved for by his friends in private. In public the young
Heinrich Bullinger was charged with rescuing the Reformed
church and restoring the tarnished reputation of the reformation.
He understood that the name Huldrych Zwingli was simply too
controversial to be mentioned. The Lutherans, with whom Bullin-
ger still harboured hopes of agreement, reviled Zwingli, while the
young John Calvin in Geneva would later make it clear that
Zwingli’s memory was too divisive, imperiling any possibility for
Protestant unity.9

Huldrych Zwingli could not be the face of the church Bullinger
struggled to erect during the 1530s. Restoration was creation and
formation, requiring a changed narrative that emphasized theo-
logical continuity with the early church, Christian appropriation of
classical learning, piety, and transformation through education.
There was no place for the belligerence of the Zwingli years during
which the Gospel was deployed to justify coercion and war. With
ink and paper, the Zurich Latin Bible embodied the essential prin-

7 Ioannis Oecolampadii et Huldrichi Zuingli epistolarum libri quatuor, Basel:

Thomas Platter and Balthasar Lasius, 1536 (Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–5.1).

8 Bruce Gordon, Holy and Problematic Deaths: Heinrich Bullinger on Zwingli and
Luther, in: Tod und Jenseitsvorstellungen in der Schriftkultur der Frühen Neuzeit, ed.
Marion Kobelt-Groch and Cornelia Niekus Moore, Wolfenbüttel 2008, 47–62.

9 Bruce Gordon, Calvin, London/New Haven 2009, 207.

4

Bruce Gordon

ciples of Bullinger’s theology and ecclesiology: a church grounded
on the Word of God and a deeply Christocentric reading of the Old
Testament. The church in Zurich is presented as standing in God’s
covenantal relationship with humanity, a firm and faithful body of
the chosen people united with the past. Bullinger revered history,
tradition, and institutions, and the 1543 Bible was very much a
book of the church. Its prefatory material and glosses speak to
Bullinger’s attempt to balance the principle of sola scriptura with
the interpretive authority of the church. The Biblia sacrosancta
was at once doctrinal, catechetical, devotional, and pedagogical in
character.

Why, one might well ask, did Protestants invest significant in-
tellectual and financial resources in the production of Latin Bibles?
The short answer requires us to understand the enduring import-
ance of Latin for the Reformation churches.10 It was not only re-
garded as a sacred language, but it was the means by which the
fruits of Hebrew and Greek scholarship could be conveyed to a
broader audience, such as the clergy. Theodor Bibliander was to
write in 1548 that Latin was the closest humanity came to a com-
mon language. It unites all the others.11

The creation of Protestant Latin Bibles, however, was fraught
with complications. What, if any, authority could these new trans-
lation possess? And, crucially, what constituted a proper transla-
tion? The scholars in Zurich, like Protestant translators in other
places, found themselves facing the vexing question of how to bal-
ance humanist learning with doctrinal and ecclesiastical precision.
This essay examines the formation of the 1543 Bible with particu-
lar attention to the way in which the Zurich scholars constructed a
narrative of authority based on their translation, use of patristic
sources, and the design of the text. The Bible that appeared in
1543 was only partially a new translation: the Zurichers had pre-
pared the Old Testament from the Hebrew and the books of the

10 On Latin in the sixteenth century see Ann Moss, Renaissance Truth and the Latin
Language Turn, Oxford 2003. On the place of Latin in the Reformed churches, see
Peter Stotz, Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575) and the Ancient Languages, in: Emidio
Campi et al. (eds.), Scholarly Knowledge: Textbooks in Early Modern Europe, Geneva
2008 (Travaux d’humanisme et renaissance 447), 113–138.

11 De ratione communi omnium linguarum et literarum commentarius, Zurich:

Christoph Froschauer, 1548 (Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–12), 30f.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

5

Apocrypha from the Greek whilst making use of a emended ver-
sion of Erasmus’ 1535 New Testament. Accompanying the trans-
lation was an extensive set of prefatorial and paratextual material,
some of which had already appeared in 1539.

The 1543 Latin Bible had a considerable history. During the
1520s under Huldrych Zwingli a group of scholars had begun
work in Zurich on the interpretation of scripture, forming a body
known as the »Lectorium« or »Prophezei«.12 What distinguished
the city on the Limmat in these early years of the Reformation was
a group of men skilled in the ancient languages who were dedi-
cated, following the principles of Erasmus, to the dissemination of
the Word of God according to the ideal of ad fontes.13 Indeed,
many of them had emerged from Erasmus’ circle in Basel. Among
the figures involved were Zwingli himself, Konrad Pellikan, who
had been recruited from Basel, Jakob Ceporin, and Leo Jud. In
brief, this learned fraternity met mornings at 8 am in the Gross-
münster to read the Bible, beginning in 1525 with Genesis. Those
gathered included the members of the chapter, the clergy of the
city, the more advanced students, and some ministers from the
rural areas. The sessions would open with a reading of the Vulgate
by a student, signifying the high authority of the Latin Bible, which
was respectfully attributed to Jerome. Initially Ceporin, succeeded
by Pellikan after his early death in 1526, was responsible for the
Hebrew, translating the text into Latin and noting the differences
with the Vulgate. Zwingli read and translated the Septuagint into
Latin and provided commentary. Leo Jud’s role was to craft a
vernacular translation that served as the basis for a sermon to the
people.14

The work of the Prophezei was not only for the education of the
clergy and laity. It was directed towards the publication of biblical
commentaries and the translation of the Bible. In March 1529 the

12 On the work of the Prophezei, see Traudel Himmighöfer, Die Zürcher Bibel bis
zum Tode Zwinglis (1531): Darstellung und Bibliographie, Mainz 1995 (Veröffentli-
chungen des Instituts für Europäische Geschichte Mainz 154), 213–235.

13 On the emergence of a the south Rhineland biblical school, see Bernard Roussel,
De Strasbourg a` Baˆle et Zurich: une »e´cole rhe´nane« d’exe´ge`se (ca 1525-ca 1540), in:
Revue d’histoire et de philosophie religieuses 68 (1988), 19–39.

14 Christoph Zürcher, Konrad Pellikans Wirken in Zürich 1526–1556, Zurich 1975

(Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 4), 34–36.

6

Bruce Gordon

Prophetenbibel was printed with an unattributed preface by
Zwingli; the prophetic books had been studied in the Prophezei
between 1527 and 1529.15 The emergence of a vernacular bible in
Zurich involved the gradual shift away from Luther’s translation
on which the Swiss scholars had initially depended. In 1531
Froschauer produced a complete Bible that was an astonishing
achievement, being the first complete vernacular Bible of the Re-
formation.16 The text, however, was not entirely native to Zurich,
as the historical books, although revised, were drawn from Lu-
ther’s translation. To the Pentateuch and prophetic books, how-
ever, the Zurichers added the poetic books and the Apocrypha,
freshly translated from the Hebrew and Greek respectively.

This visually stunning Bible of 1531 was highly theological in
nature, containing a preface by Zwingli and a phalanx of parallel
texts and annotations (over 14,000). Most remarkable were the
190 woodcuts by Hans Holbein. Beautiful and theologically atten-
tive this Bible may have been, but the Zurich translation project
was by no means exhausted. During the 1530s the vernacular Bible
continued to be revised with new translations from Hebrew and
Greek appearing as the Zurich scholars progressed through the
books of the Bible.17 By the middle years of the 1530s the Zurich
scholars had produced their own translations of all the biblical
books, an endeavour overseen by Leo Jud and Konrad Pellikan.

Contemporaneous with the work on the vernacular Bibles was a
concentration on Latin biblical commentaries.18 Zwingli had trans-

15 Edwin Künzli, Vorwort zur Vorrede zur Prophetenbibel, in: Huldreich Zwinglis

sämtliche Werke, vol. VI/2, Zurich 1968, 283–288.

16 The standard work is Himmighöfer, Die Zürcher Bibel, esp. 368–421.
17 Although Froschauer continued to print Bibles during the 1530s, a full revision of
the 1531 Bible came in 1539/40 after the arrival in Zurich of the Jewish convert Mi-
chael Adam, who worked with Jud and Pellikan. In the 1540 Bible the concordance
prepared for 1536 and 1538 printings was included. Johann Jakob Mezger, Geschichte
der deutschen Bibelübersetzungen in der schweizerisch-reformierten Kirche von der Re-
formation bis zur Gegenwart, Basel 1876, 119–121.

18 On Zwingli’s exegesis, see Fritz Büsser, Zwingli, the Exegete: A Contribution to
the 450th Anniversary of the Death of Erasmus, in: Probing the Reformed Tradition:
Historical Studies in Honor of Edward A. Dowey, ed. Elsie McKee, Louisville 1989,
175–196; R. Gerald Hobbs, Zwingli and the Study of the Old Testament, in: Huldrych
Zwingli (1484–1531): Legacy of a Radical Reform, ed. Edward J. Furcha, Montreal
1985, 144–178; Gerhard Krause, Zwinglis Auslegung der Propheten, in: Zwingliana
11/4 (1960), 257–265; Edwin Künzli, Zwingli als Ausleger von Genesis und Exodus,

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

7

lated into Latin with commentary the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and Lamentations, while his exegesis of Genesis and Exodus ap-
peared after his death. As Peter Opitz has explained, »Zwingli’s
›exegetical‹ Old Testament writings can only be characterized as
genuine commentaries in a limited sense, however, since the ex-
planations take various forms. Often they consist merely of ex-
planations of words that draw on comparisons of usage in other
passages, as well as on the Septuagint and the Vulgate. Zwingli’s
goal is evidently to avoid standing between the text and its audi-
ence with his exegetical comments, but rather to let the text
speak.«19 This approach would be radically altered by Zwingli’s
successors. Although he was a competent Hebraist, Zwingli had a
high view of both the Vulgate and the Septuagint and was deeply
attached to them.20 This accompanied a suspicion of the Masoretic
text grounded in a worry that the use of rabbinic sources would
corrupt the Christian message. He had Konrad Pellikan write to
Kaspar Hedio following the appearance of his Hosea commentary
to express concern about the effects of Judaizing.21

The tension over the use of rabbinic sources troubled the Zurich
church.22 Although Pellikan was one of the leading Hebraists of his
day, he remained wedded to the use of the Vulgate, as was evident
in his major work, a commentary on the whole of the Bible (Com-
mentaria bibliorum), printed between 1532 and 1535.23 He used as

Zurich 1950; Max Lienhard, Aus der Arbeit an Zwinglis Exegetica zum Neuen Testa-
ment: Zu den Quellen der Schriftauslegung,
in: Zwingliana 18/4–5 (1990/1991),
310–328; George R. Potter, Zwingli and the Book of Psalms, in: Sixteenth Century
Journal 10/2 (1979), 43–50.

19 Peter Opitz, Zwingli’s Exegesis of the Old Testament, in: Magne Saebø (ed.),
Hebrew Bible/Old Testament: The History of its Interpretation, vol. 2, Göttingen 2008,
422f.

20 On the complicated relationship of the Septuagint and the Vulgate, see Paul B.
Decock, Jerome’s Turn to the Hebraica Veritas and his Rejection of the Traditional View
of the Septuagint, in: Neotestamentica 42/2 (2008), 205–222.

21 Opitz, Zwingli’s Exegesis of the Old Testament, 476.
22 Essential reading is Stephen G. Burnett, Christian Hebraism in the Reformation
Era (1500–1660): Authors, Books, and the Transmission of Jewish Learning, Leiden
2012 (Library of the Written Word 19), esp. 11–47: »Birth of a Christian Hebrew
Reading Public«.

23 On Pellikan’s Commentaria, see Zürcher, Konrad Pellikans Wirken, esp. 85–152;
R. Gerald Hobbs, Conrad Pellican and the Psalms: The Ambivalent Legacy of a Pioneer
Hebraist, in: Reformation and Renaissance Review 1 (1999), 72–99. See also R. Gerald

8

Bruce Gordon

his text the Vulgate, which he attributed to Jerome, claiming that
he would depart from the church father only when required by the
Hebrew.24 In his preface he stated that he would have been content
with the Vulgate as it was but the printer Froschauer and his col-
leagues pressed him to revise the text.25 His commentary also re-
flected the change in direction in Zurich biblical scholarship after
Zwingli’s death in 1531. In his preface Pellikan expressed concern
that the work of the Prophezei had been overly concerned with
grammatical questions. In contrast, his commentary was directed
at educating the clergy and would be, therefore, written in simple
Latin and focus on theological and pastoral issues. His rule for
correcting the Latin proved highly conservative as he made rela-
tively few alterations, and when he did emend the text the changes
were strikingly in line with the Latin Bible of Sanctes Pagninus, the
Dominican scholar of Lyon who produced a Latin translation in
1528.26

Pellikan offered an extensive treatment of how Christians should
read Jewish authors.27 The providential role of the printing press, a
theme stressed in the preface, had, in his view, made the Jewish
texts available in order that one might learn more clearly the dic-
tion and grammar of the language.28 The Jewish authors, however,

Hobbs, Pluriformity of Early Reformation Scriptural Interpretation, in: Saebø, Hebrew
Bible, 482–484.

24 Pellikan, like Zwingli, was deeply attached to the Vulgate because of its familiar-
ity. In the preface to his Commentaria he wrote, »please God the popular translation
continue in venerable authority amongst the Christian people, and that this one we have
done be compared with it«. Cited from Hobbs, Pluriformity, 485.

25 Hobbs, Pluriformity, 485.
26 Biblia: habes in hoc libro prudens lector utriusque instrumenti novam translati-
onem aeditum a reverendo sacrae theologiae doctore Sancte Pagnino Lucensi [...], [Ly-
on: Antoine du Ry], 1528.

27 See the review article by Jonathan Karp, Jews, Hebraism, and the Reformation
World, in: Reformation 12 (2007), 177–190; Heiko A. Oberman, Discovery of Hebrew
and Discrimination Against the Jews: The Veritas Hebraica as Double-Edged Sword in
Renaissance and Reformation, in: Germania Illustrata: Essays on Early Modern Ger-
many Presented to Gerald Strauss, ed. Andrew C. Fix and Susan C. Karant-Nunn,
Kirksville, MO 1992, 19–34. See also the essays in: Hebraica Veritas? Christian Hebra-
ists and the Study of Judaism in Early Modern Europe, ed. Allison P. Coudert and
Jeffrey S. Shoulson, Philadelphia 2004, esp. Stephen G. Burnett, Reassessing the »Basel-
Witttenberg Conflict«: Dimension of the Reformation-Era Discussion of Hebrew Schol-
arship, 181–201.

28 Commentaria Bibliorum et illa brevia quidem ac catholica, eruditissimi simul et

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

9

provided nothing that pertains to the truth of dogma as they were
ignorant of Christ, and even cursed him. As they were blinded by
God, so their eyes were closed to the truth of scripture. Their
teachings had many shortcomings, and their Chaldean translations
and paraphrases contained the errors found in their commentaries.
The Talmudic fables should be banished from the Christian re-
public.29

Pellikan’s contribution to Zurich biblical culture was enormous.
The Commentaria went through three printings. Most significant-
ly, it provided the theological basis for the Zurich church in the
period after the Kappel War of 1531 and Zwingli’s sudden death.
As the teacher of Hebrew in the Lectorium, Pellikan set his mark
on the way in which the Bible was to be read, and the extensive
notes that accompanied his Latin text formed a foundation for the
theological shape of the 1543 Bible. But he did not work alone. In
1531 his erstwhile student Theodor Bibliander arrived in the city
from Basel.30 A native Swiss, Bibliander had also studied with
Oecolampadius, who was to prove an influential master. Oecolam-
padius was bold and polemical and insisted on translating from the
Hebrew, creating fresh Latin versions. Pellikan, as we have seen,
shared with Zwingli a reverence for the Vulgate.

Bibliander took up the position of professor of Old Testament,
though he seems to have shared the task with Pellikan; it would be
misleading to assume that one was a theologian and the other a
grammarian. In 1535 Bibliander produced a Hebrew grammar,31
while Pellikan was writing his very theological commentary. Bib-

piissimi viri Chuonradi Pellicani Rubeaquensis, qui et Vulgatam commentariis inseruit
aeditionem, sed ad Hebraicam lectionem accurate emendatam, [Zurich: Christoph
Froschauer, 1532–1535], A4v.

29 Commentaria Bibliorum, A4v. On Pellikan’s anti-Jewish sentiments, see Zürcher,

Konrad Pellikans Wirken, 209–215.

30 On Bibliander, see Christine Christ-v. Wedel, Theodor Bibliander in seiner Zeit,
in: Christine Christ-v. Wedel (ed.), Theodor Bibliander 1505–1564: Ein Thurgauer im
Gelehrten Zürich der Reformationszeit, Zurich 2005, 19–60. On Bibliander’s teaching
Anja-Silvia Goeing, Vernünftig unterrichten: Bibliander als Lehrer, in Christ-v. Wedel,
Theodor Bibliander, 61–82.

31 Institutionem grammaticarum de lingua Hebraea liber unus, Zurich: Christoph
Froschauer, 1535 (Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–4). On Bibliander’s Hebrew gram-
mar, see Anja Silvia-Goeing, Establishing Modes of Learning: Old and New Hebrew
Grammars in the 16th Century, in: Campi et al., Scholarly Knowledge, 157–182.

10

Bruce Gordon

liander delivered his lectures on the Old Testament, which were
attended by the leading churchmen in Zurich.32 To give a sense of
the cross-pollination taking place within the city – it is likely that
much of the material in Pellikan’s notes for his commentary came
from the lectures held by Bibliander. We know that when he ar-
rived at a particularly troublesome passage in Ezekiel concerning
the temple vision (ch. 40–48) Pellikan turned to Bibliander for
assistance.33

Bibliander’s distinctive voice was also heard in 1534 when he
produced a translation with commentary of the Old Testament
prophet Nahum, very much in the style of Oecolampadius.34 Quite
arresting was Bibliander’s attitude towards the Vulgate. Whereas
Pellikan had made use of the Vulgate in his commentary, Biblian-
der set his own translation alongside Jerome’s, as his teacher Oeco-
lampadius had done, not with the intention of revision, but to
present an entirely different rendering of the prophet. In his prefa-
tory letter, Bibliander argued that Nahum had not been translated
by learned men of his age.35 In other words, it had not been treated
by the humanists. This prophetic book, which speaks of God’s
judgement upon the nations, Bibliander added, was most appro-
priate for his own turbulent times, and should, therefore, be pu-
blished in the interest of the church. As for his own role as trans-
lator, he adopted a guarded position:

»But I am not unaware that I am unequal with other divine translators,
inasmuch as having been more fluent they are suited to the ears of our age,
and that the majority also recommend shorter annotations, and indicate
their opinions through pin pricks (as I might say). Indeed since our labour
already seems to carry moderate influence in sacred letters or among those
who have made a little progress, I have preferred to consult the work of
those rather than my private opinion and to withdraw my own boldness in
letters rather than to thrust it forth into the most sacred laws of charity«36

32 Ernst Staehlin, Die biblischen Vorlesungen Theodor Biblianders in einer Abschrift

seines Bruders Heinrich Bibliander, in: Zwingliana 7/8 (1942), 522–526.

33 Moser, Theodor Bibliander, nos. B–2.1–3.
34 On the text and Bibliander’s translation method, see Bruce Gordon, Christo te-
stimonium reddunt omnes scripturae: Theodor Bibliander’s Oration on Isaiah (1532)
and Commentary on Nahum (1534), in: Gordon/ McLean, Shaping the Bible, 107–142.
35 Propheta Nahum iuxta veritatem Hebraicam redditur, Zurich: Christoph Frosch-

auer, 1534 (Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–3), 2r.

36 Propheta Nahum, 2r–v.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

11

Bibliander’s tone anticipated the Zurich Latin Bible of a decade
later in the manner that deference to other translators and sense of
humility were tempered by the assurance that other scholars had
been consulted in the preparation of the text. Further, the defen-
sive stance belied a confidence in the linguistic achievements of the
commentary. Concerning the nature of his translation, Bibliander
provided a sense of purpose.

»I have at the same time raised my spirit to the divine explication of this
writer Nahum, and also I have translated him anew into the Latin tongue,
not only having imitated the special quality of the Hebrew and Roman
words, but also having attempted to imitate the strength of
their
eloquence.«37

For Bibliander, the translator possessed a prophetic spirit, for he
»raised his spirit to the divine explication of this writer [Nahum]«.
The translator acquires a distinctive voice, obliged both to achieve
a fair rendering of the original Hebrew but also to provide the
reader with good Latin. This claim distinguished his work, Biblian-
der argued, from the Vulgate occupying the other half of the page,
which was neither entirely accurate nor appealing Latin. However,
the relationship to Jerome’s work was more complicated. A new
translation, according to Bibliander, did not amount to a rejection
of the Vulgate, which he freely declared to be the Bible of the
Church. No one should think that he was attempting to replace the
church father, though in a somewhat veiled critique he commented
that Jerome was wont to remain a little too close to the Jewish
sources. He concluded the letter to the reader with an appeal to
Augustine found in the Zurich vernacular Bibles and later
referenced by Bullinger in the 1543 Latin Bible. The divine Au-
gustine held, Bibliander wrote, that it was useful to compare va-
rious translations, as well as to preserve what is familiar to the
people, so that out of the collision of many versions the light of
truth might spring forth more productively.38

Bibliander’s remarks reflect the multiple purposes of biblical
translation in Zurich in which the ideals of both Jerome and Au-

37 Propheta Nahum, 2v.
38 Propheta Nahum, 2v.

12

Bruce Gordon

gustine were appropriated. The inclusion of the Vulgate text was
drawn from Augustine’s argument that what was familiar to the
church and people should be retained, whatever its shortcomings.
Bibliander’s translation of Nahum, however, was in the spirit of
Jerome’s principle of Hebraica veritas, the best possible interpre-
tation of the original based on sound philology and use of rabbinic
sources. Zurich sought to balance the two needs: humanist schol-
arship and pastoral care.

In Zurich the distinctive views of text and translation arose from
a highly theological approach in which doctrinal instruction was
embedded in the choice of vocabulary. Both Pellikan’s Commen-
taria and Bibliander’s Nahum, alongside works by Bullinger and
Leo Jud, emphasized translation in the service of theological clar-
ity. Alongside the use of words that carried specific theological
meaning, the vernacular Bibles were heavily glossed and introdu-
ced with chapter summaries and extensive prefaces. In the Latin
works the style of translation followed the principle of »compla-
natio«, a smoothing of the text in pursuit of elegance and lucidity
whilst retaining fidelity to the original.39 At all cost an overly literal
rendering of the original was to be avoided.

The result was a complex set of demands. What developed in
Zurich stood in uneasy relationship to the first major Protestant
translation of the Bible into Latin, which had appeared in 1534/35
in the nearby Swiss city of Basel, and was by Sebastian Münster, a
former student of Konrad Pellikan.40 This Bible offered a fairly
literal rendering of the Hebrew together with extensive use of rab-
binic material – large extracts of Jewish writings were inserted into
the notes, something that appalled Luther. Münster’s Bible was a
major achievement in Hebrew scholarship. It first appeared in
1534 and 1535 in two folio volumes; this diglot text placed the
Hebrew of Bomberg’s first Rabbinic Bible alongside Münster’s en-
tirely new Latin translation in parallel columns. Each book of the

39 Hobbs, Pluriformity, 485.
40 Hebraica Biblia Latina planeque nova Sebastiani Munsteri tralatione, Basel: Jo-
hann Bebel for Michael Isengrin and Heinrich Petri, 1534/1535. On Münster, see the
old, but useful biography Karl Heinz Burmeister, Sebastian Münster: Versuch eines
biographischen Gesamtbildes, Basel 1963; Sophie Kessler Mesguich, Early Christian
Hebraists, in: Saebø, Hebrew Bible, 268–272; Burnett, Reassessing, 181–201.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

13

Bible was prefaced by a Latin introduction, and each chapter fol-
lowed by Münster’s Latin commentary. The translation was a col-
ossal task, undertaken by a scholar working alone, and was, and
remained, an immense service to scholars in an age when the com-
munity of Christian scholars with a genuine mastery of Hebrew
was miniscule, a bare handful.

First of all, Münster translated literally, substituting word for
word as best he was able; where was meaning if not in individual
words? The result was »harsh«, »barbarous«,
language which
lacked the sonorous cadences and grammatical precision which a
generation of Latinate humanists had been trained to practise and
to esteem. Münster was unrepentant. This translation was by de-
sign »religious« not »Ciceronian«, and he expressed impatience
with »delicate Latin ears«; such niceties were appropriate to pro-
fane literature, and not to Scripture, wherein even the Hebrew
word order contained mysteries. He utterly rejected the concept of
eloquence. The language must conform to the mind and spirit of
the Hebrew peoples, even at the cost of retaining awkward-sound-
ing Hebrew idioms. To change unnecessarily was to bleed mean-
ing. Furthermore his annotations glossed every chapter with the
interpretations of the Jewish mediaeval exegetes: Münster’s ap-
proach to teaching was to hold nothing back, to trust the discrim-
ination of the reader. The »obscure and tangled places« in scrip-
ture could not be fully understood without knowledge of the Heb-
rew tradition, and, although he anticipated attacks – Johannes Eck
called him »rabbi Münster« – he intended to mediate this learning
in service of a Christian readership. Indeed, it was as a combatant
that he sought through his Bible to assert the Christian interpre-
tation of the Old Testament, that it prefigured and prophesied the
messiahship of Christ to any who read it aright.

How, then, did Münster regard Jerome’s Vulgate? Münster, as
had many before him, pointed to the »innumerable« and »intoler-
able errors« in the Vulgate translation as the motive for underta-
king a new version. Yet Jerome for Münster, as for Pellikan and
Bibliander, remained a model, and a forerunner, and a shield
against criticism and smears.41 Jerome translated from the Hebrew,

41 On the crucial role of Jerome in early modern biblical discourse, see Scott

14

Bruce Gordon

sought out Jewish teachers, toiled alone.42 Jerome also cautioned
that Scripture was too important for indulging in stylistic elegan-
cies. Münster resolved the tension by revering Jerome but denying
that that he was the author of the Vulgate: one need only look at
Jerome’s commentaries, in which the mistranslations did not ap-
pear, to see this. The Vulgate was a patchwork of lesser minds;
Jerome remained a model and a guide for the translator of Sacred
Literature.

Münster’s Bible was to appear in an expanded form in 1546, but
at the end of the 1530s a curious episode took place that demon-
strated both the strength of the communal approach to biblical
scholarship that marked the South Rhineland school and the latent
tensions.43 The Zurich Church, in need of a Latin Bible, sought to
put together Münster’s text with the New Testament of Erasmus.44
The Apocryphal books came from the Complutensian Polyglot.
The Bible appeared in 1539 with an extensive preface by Bullinger
in which he attacked pagan learning and wrote of »our wisdom«.
For his part, Münster wrote to Bullinger, thanking him for the
theological preface he had written in which Münster’s translation
was praised as »fide optima, dilegentia summa et sudoribus ina-
estimabilis«.45

Mandelbrote, Origen against Jerome in Early Modern Europe, in: Patristic Tradition
and Intellectual Paradigms in the 17th Century, ed. Silke-Petra Bergjan and Karla Poll-
mann, Tübingen 2010 (Spätmittelalter, Humanismus, Reformation 52), 105–135.

42 On Jerome and translation, see Jerome Rebenich, Jerome: The »Vir trilinguis« and
the »Hebraica veritas«, in: Vigiliae christianae 47 (1993), 50–77; Vincent T. M. Skemp,
Learning by Example: Exempla in Jerome’s Translations and Revisions of Biblical
Books, in: Vigiliae christianae 65 (2011), 257–284; Andrew Cain, The Letters of Jer-
ome: Asceticism, Biblical Exegesis, and the Construction of Christian Authority in Late
Antiquity, Oxford/New York 2009; Michael Graves, Jerome’s Hebrew Philology: A
Study Based on His Commentary on Jeremiah, Leiden 2007; Megan Hale Williams, The
Monk and the Book: Jerome and the Making of Christian Scholarship, Chicago 2006.
43 See Matthew McLean, Between Basel and Zürich: Humanist Rivalries and the

Works of Sebastian Münster, in: Walsby/Kemp, The Book Triumphant, 270–294.

44 Biblia sacra utriusque testamenti et vetus quidem post omnes omnium hactenus
aeditiones opera d. Sebastiani Munsteri evulgatum et ad Hebraicam veritatem quoad
fieri potuit redditum [...] Novum vero non solum ad Graecam veritatem, verum etiam
ad multorum utriusque linguae et interpretum et codicum fidem opera d. Erasmi Rot-
terodami ultimo recognitum et aeditum. Additi sunt e LXX versione et Apocryphi libri
sive Ecclesiastici, qui habentur extra canonem, Zurich: Christoph Froschauer, 1539.

45 In Bullinger’s preface to the 1539 Bible, De Versione Bibliorum. On Bullinger’s
reliance on other scholars for Hebrew, Stotz, Heinrich Bullinger, 126f. Münster’s letter

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

15

Yet, despite Münster’s pleasure in the adoption of his transla-
tion, the 1539 Bible presented it in a fashion at odds with his
intended design. Offered as an octavo, this edition saw Münster’s
text shorn of the Hebrew-language column which the Latin co-
lumn translated, shorn of the notes which explained words and the
interpretations of the rabbis, shorn of its prefatory material, save
that passage on the ordering of the canonical books. In this form it
was not fit to serve its intended scholarly purpose. Without the
annotations, the style of Münster’s translation, so deliberately
adopted to remove »obscuritas«, served no purpose and could only
seem awkward alongside the New Testament of Erasmus.46 That
the edition went ahead in such a form appears to have been the
will not of the Zürich scholars, and certainly not of Münster, but
of the Basel printers who had underwritten the first edition of the
Hebraica Biblia.

Münster’s literal translation was not in line with the thinking of
Bibliander, and without any annotations the Bible lacked theo-
logical shape. It was only printed once, but it bore testimony to the
desire in Zurich church for a Latin translation of both testaments.
Work on the vernacular Bible had continued apace and by 1540 a
completely revised translation was printed by Froschauer.47 It was
at this point that Leo Jud was commissioned to begin work on a
new Latin edition.

Why, one might ask, was Leo Jud charged with such an import-
ant task when such leading Hebraists as Pellikan and Bibliander
were in the city? The answer is more complex than one might
imagine. Certainly, Pellikan and Bibliander were committed to
their teaching duties. Jud, for his part, was no novice, having been
an assiduous translator of biblical, theological, and devotional
texts for almost twenty years. During the 1530s a stream of ver-
nacular editions of Erasmus, Thomas a` Kempis, and the medieval

to Bullinger is dated 6 April 1539. A brief note recording this appears in Bullinger’s
Diarium: Heinrich Bullingers Diarium (Annales vitae) der Jahre 1504–1574, ed. Emil
Egli, Basel 1904 (Quellen zur schweizerischen Reformationsgeschichte 2), 27.

46 Hebraica Biblia, β5r: the annotations repair any obscurity caused by the use of

Hebraisms in the translation.

47 Die gantze Bibel, das ist, alle Bu¨ cher allts unnd neu¨ ws Testaments den urspru¨ ng-
lichen Spraachen nach auffs aller treu¨ wlichest verteu¨ tschet, Zurich: Christoph Frosch-
auer, 1540.

16

Bruce Gordon

writer Ratramnus appeared.48 Jud had been involved with the Pro-
phezei from the start and was above all responsible for the evol-
ving translations of the Zurich Bible.49

However, there is more to the story, including an element central
to the character of the 1543 Bible. The Latin translation was to be
closely associated with Leo Jud not only because it was largely his
work, but because he personally symbolized the Bible itself. As we
shall see, in his preface to the edition, Heinrich Bullinger provides
a vita of the dead Jud, attributing to him all the ideals of the
Zurich church. The Jud of the 1543 Bible emerged as the model of
Zurich scholarship, piety, and moderation. He had been in Zurich
for the beginning of the reform movement in the early 1520s, sur-
vived the vicissitudes, and his spirit of learning, pastoral care, and
humility was an exemplum for Bullinger’s post-Kappel recon-
structed church. By turning to Jud Bullinger was able to return to
the origins of the Zurich reformation while embracing the changes
essential for a new order. Jud was a founding father of the Zurich
church, but the model he provided was of the scholar pastor, a
man commemorated for his love of his parishioners, his excellent
preaching, and careful scholarship. Jud was all the things Bullinger
wanted to valorize, and, helpfully, he was not Zwingli.

The 1543 Zurich Latin Bible

The Zurich Latin Bible has a fascinating print history. In early
1543 it appeared in folio from the press of Christoph Froschauer,50

48 On Leo Jud’s translation work see Christian Moser, Ratramnus von Corbie als
»testis veritatis« in der Zürcher Reformation: Zu Heinrich Bullinger und Leo Juds
Ausgabe des »Liber de corpore et sanguine Domini« (1532), in: Strenarum lanx: Bei-
träge zur Philologie und Geschichte des Mittelalters und der Frühen Neuzeit. Festgabe
für Peter Stotz zum 40-jährigen Jubiläum des Mittellateinischen Seminars der Univer-
sität Zürich, ed. Martin H. Graf and Christian Moser, Zug 2003, 235–309.

49 Backus has shown how this was reflected in his interpretation of the book of
Revelation: Irena Backus, Reformation Readings of the Apocalypse: Geneva, Zurich,
and Wittenberg, Oxford 2000 (Oxford Studies in Historical Theology), 93f.

50 Biblia sacrosancta testamenti veteris et novi, e sacra Hebraeorum lingua Grae-
corumque fontibus, consultis simul orthodoxis interpretibus religiosissime translata in
sermonem Latinum [...], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer, 1543 (Moser, Theodor Biblian-
der, no. B–8.1a/b).

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

17

followed the next year by quarto and octavo editions with much of
the critical apparatus removed.51 The octavo Biblia has none of the
prefatory material. The whole text was produced again in Zurich
in 1550.52 In 1545 the Zurich translation mysteriously appeared in
Paris from the press of the royal Robert Estienne.53 The edition,
designated a »nova translatio« without attribution to Protestant
Zurich, was alongside the text of the Vulgate. The only portions of
the prefatory material retained were the Compendium and list of
books. The work became known as the »Vatable Bible« on account
of the extensive notes included from Franc¸ois Vatable’s lectures by
his students and was reprinted in Paris by Estienne in 1565.54 In
1546 Estienne produced an edition of the Psalms with the Vulgate
and Zurich Latin translations, once more with the notes from Va-
table’s lectures.55 Perhaps most astonishing was the printing of the
Vatable Bible in 1584/5 in Salamanca. The parallel Vulgate and
Zurich Latin translations appeared with the Vatable notes, which
had been somewhat revised by Francesco Sancho and the theolo-
gians of Salamanca university. Whether the provenance of the Zur-
ich translation was known to the Spanish scholars is not known.56
The Biblia sacrosancta is structured in three parts. The first sec-
tion contains the prefatory material and the Old Testament, open-
ing with an Encomium Scripturae sanctae followed by an unsigned
letter to the reader most likely written by Bullinger on behalf of the
scholars involved in the translation (Bibliander, Pellikan and
Gwalther). This letter precedes a modified version of the preface
Bullinger had written for the 1539 Bible.57 The two prefaces are
followed by a Compendium et scopus totius sacrae Scripturae
utriusque Testamenti. The books of the Old Testament were order-
ed according to a pattern that the Zurich scholars believed to come

51 Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–8.2 (quarto) and B–8.3 (octavo).
52 Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–8.6.
53 Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–8.4.
54 Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–8.7.
55 Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–8.5.
56 Moser, Theodor Bibliander, no. B–8.8.
57 The letter to the reader is entitled, »De operis huius instituto et ratione ad Chris-
tianum lectorem praefatio«. The preface from the 1539 Bible is »De omnibus sanctae
scripturae libris eorumque praestantia et dignitate Heinrychi Bullingeri expositio, ad
lectorem Christianum.«

18

Bruce Gordon

from Cyprian.58 As the preface states, the principal translator was
Leo Jud, but following Jud’s death in 1542 Theodor Bibliander
took over the task and was responsible for Ezekiel 40–48, Daniel,
Job, Psalms 102–150, Ecclesiastes and the Song of Solomon.59 As
noted above, Bibliander’s translation of Nahum was reprinted in
the 1543 Bible.

The second part of the Bible was the work of one man, Petrus
Cholinus, who taught Greek in Zurich. He took responsibility for
the Apocryphal books, or the »ecclesiastici libri« as they were
named, for which he wrote an extensive preface dated 30 October
1542. The third part of the Bible is the New Testament, which is a
slightly revised version of the 1535 Erasmus New Testament and
annotations. The work on the New Testament was largely under-
taken by Rudolph Gwalther, though Cholinus collaborated on the
task until his death from the plague. A remarkable feature of the
New Testament was Rudolf Gwalther’s Argumenta, a verse sum-
mary of the whole Bible, designed to be learned by heart. Our
discussion of the Bible will focus on its prefatory material with
particular attention to the new preface prepared in 1543.

The Zurich Latin Bible was printed with two different title
pages. One bore the coat-of-arms of the city of Zurich and the
other Froschauer’s printer’s mark. The printing house was closely
connected to the ruling magistrates and the presence of the city’s
arms on the title page only reinforced the official nature of the
Bible. Also on the title page is a quotation from Romans 15:4:
»For whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scrip-
tures might have hope.«

The prefatory material opens with the Encomium Scripturae
sanctae, which is a series of quotations from scripture emphasizing
the continuity between the two Testaments. The choice of term
»encomium« is most intriguing, for the words of the Bible are used

58 Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1–2
Samuel, 1–2 Kings, 1–2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamen-
tations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habak-
kuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song
of Songs.

59 See Moser, Theodor Bibliander, 65.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

19

to pour praise on scripture. The authors are clear that the begin-
ning point of their Bible is God’s Word. The biblical passages
speak to God’s intervention in the world through his communi-
cation. God has spoken, issued his commands and it is the duty of
the people to obey. »From heaven he made you hear his voice to
discipline you. On earth he showed you his great fire, and you
heard his words from out of the fire« (Deut 4:36), and »Keep his
commands and obey him; serve him and hold fast to him« (Deut.
13:4). There are also quotations from psalm 22 and 2 Timothy.
Likewise, the Encomium quotes from Luke 16:29: »Abraham re-
plied,
let them listen to
them‹«. The passages chosen for the Encomium reflect profound
themes in Zurich theology and ecclesiology: the one covenant
uniting the two Testaments; the Christological reading of the Old
Testament; and the emphasis on prophetic authority.

›they have Moses and the prophets;

Following the Encomium is an anonymous and lengthy apology
for the Zurich Bible (running to nine folio sides) likely written by
Heinrich Bullinger and entitled De operis huius institutio et rati-
one. This preface will form the focus of the remaining part of the
paper. The theological character of the Bible is revealed in the
order of the prefatory material. First, in the Encomium scripture
authenticates itself. De operis provides the historical and scholarly
justification of the Zurich Bible. The second preface treats the na-
ture of scripture and provides an account of the books of the Bible.
Finally, in the Compendium the Zurich scholars present a state-
ment of faith that forms the foundation of their theological reading
of the Bible.

Let us turn to the first preface. De operis huius institutio et
ratione details the methods employed in the preparation of the
Bible and addresses the crucial objections which the Zurichers an-
ticipated to a new Latin translation. A key rhetorical strategy in De
operis was for the Zurichers to allow certain church fathers, not-
ably Jerome and Augustine, to speak on behalf of their church. The
tone is set as the preface opens with a quotation from Jerome’s
letter to Pope Damasus:

»Pious work, yet perilous presumption, to change the old and aging lan-
guage of the world, to carry it back to infancy, for to judge others is to
invite judging by all of them. Is there indeed any learned or unlearned man,

20

Bruce Gordon

who when he picks up the volume in his hand, and takes a single taste of it,
and sees what he will have read to differ, might not instantly raise his voice,
calling me a forger, proclaiming me now to be a sacrilegious man, that I
might dare to add, to change, or to correct anything in the old books?«60

The translators of the Zurich Bible fully expected to be attacked
for their efforts, but this response only justified their enterprise
because it associated them with Jerome, who was fiercely criti-
cized. The appeal to Jerome was subtle and multifaceted. Princi-
pally, Jerome was a model of scholarship and piety, and the Zur-
ichers sought to cast their biblical work in his image. This action,
however, was not without a degree of tension as the status of the
Vulgate was somewhat ambiguous. On the one hand, the Zurich
scholars, like Münster, were wary of suggesting that the Vulgate as
received was Jerome’s work. Yet, on the other, they spoke of the
common version of the Latin Bible that was to be honoured. Fur-
ther, although Bullinger sought protection behind the words of
Jerome and Augustine, there was a clear sense that the translation
produced in Zurich was superior in terms of scholarship. This
posturing was precisely what Bibliander had done in his Nahum
commentary. The Zurich Bible was rooted in antiquity but its
quality was owing to the humanist scholarship of the sixteenth
century.

Nevertheless, Jerome was the model to be emulated and the Zur-
ich scholars identified key principles they had appropriated from
the father: that he had not undertaken the translation for any per-
sonal gain, but rather because the pope had commissioned him;
that he had done it in great love; that he had not added or sub-
tracted anything to sacred scripture; and that he had worked from
the original Hebrew and Greek.61 The Zurichers aligned them-
selves with these ideals, arguing that they did not have a private
desire for a translation but had the tasked urged on them by
»pious brothers«. Many leaders of the churches requested a new
translation, and at first they had demurred, not because they
thought themselves unequipped, but on account of their belief that
others were better positioned to complete the task. Bullinger came

60 Biblia sacrosancta, α2r. Translation at http://www.ccel.org/ccel/pearse/more-

fathers/files/jerome preface gospels.htm.

61 Biblia sacrosancta, α2r.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

21

to his central argument in justifying a new translation. There was
not merely one translation from the Hebrew and Greek into Latin
in existence.62 No form of writing, the preface continued, is more
open to calumnies than translation, for even the learned disagree
and are in love with their own versions. No one can know every-
thing, Bullinger wrote, and 1 Corinthians 13:9 (»we know in part
[...]«) was quoted to support the Zurich contention that it was not
sufficient to have one Bible, because no one individual or group of
scholars possess the ability to produce a definitive version.

The preface extends the argument. Not only should there be
more than one translation, but there was something deficient in the
existing Latin editions. Those who had undertaken translations
from the Hebrew scriptures should be praised for their efforts, yet
there were difficulties. Some had remained too close to the Sep-
tuagint, a sensitive point given Zwingli’s veneration of the inspired
ancient Greek translation. Others had followed too zealously the
old Latin translations, while others had been too literal in their
rendering of the Hebrew.63 The reference to the Latin translations
meant the Vulgate.

The translation of Sebastian Münster fell in the final category,
and although it is clear from the annotations of the Zurich Bible
that his work was heavily consulted and referenced, Jud, Biblian-
der, and Pellikan rejected his rendering of Hebrew as suitable for
reading. The consequence of these shortcomings, according to the
preface, was the failure to produce a coherent Latin translation.
These remarks from the preface are all the more striking if we
consider their implication for Zurich biblical culture. Bullinger was
arguing that there was a place for a new Latin translation because
no satisfactory one existed. Quite consciously he was distinguish-
ing the 1543 Bible from what had come before: the reliance on the
Septuagint (Zwingli), the Vulgate (Pellikan), and literal translation
(Münster).

The Zurichers uncoupled Jerome from the Vulgate in order to
associate him with their translation project. The connection be-
tween Jerome and the Zurich Bible was made explicit in the por-

62 »Praterea extare hodie non unam Bibliorum ex hebraerorum et Graecorum fon-

tibus depromptam translationem Latinam.« Biblia sacrosancta, α2r.

63 Biblia sacrosancta, α2v.

22

Bruce Gordon

trayal of Leo Jud in the preface. To put it briefly, the vita of Jud
was crafted to cast him in the likeness of the great translator of the
Bible. Like Jerome, Jud was undaunted by detractors and followed
the saying of the church father that »in the temple of God each one
offers what he is able, some gold, some silver, some precious
stones, others linen and purple and scarlet cloth; for us, it is fine if
we offer the skin and hair of goats.«64 Jud also made reference to
another passage of Jerome, which he adopted as his own. »There
are different gifts and talents of God, and cursed be the one who
does not diligently busy himself with his entrusted talent; and so,
in my poverty, I will attempt to be of some profit, if I am able«.65
Bullinger put the words of Jerome into Jud’s mouth; he not only
translated according to the manner of the church father, but he
spoke with the same voice. Jerome emerged as the patron of the
Zurich Bible, turning the argument of the reformers’ opponents on
its head. Rather than causing offence by offering a rival Latin
translation, they had followed the legacy of Jerome, who, as they
interpreted him, advocated a plurality of editions.

The Leo Jud presented in the preface possessed many of the
qualities of Jerome. Jud studied the Latin and Greek editions, as
well as orthodox commentators of the Church, and after more
than eighteen years of labour began to produce a new translation
of the Old Testament from the Hebraica veritas. In his translation
project he read the rabbinic interpretations, old and recent Chris-
tian writers, and did philological work. The preface described him
as having a stack of books »like a forest«. All of this, and this
point is crucial, was for the use of the Church (»ecclesia utilita-
tem«). Jud consulted with his colleagues, and when they corrected
him he took it with good grace. He was aided by the work and
diligence of the most renowned men, meaning Bibliander and Pel-
likan, who were experts in the Hebrew language and knew the
commentaries. Like Jerome, according to the preface, he did not
omit, distort, corrupt, or shorten the text.

The portrait of Leo Jud (or imitatio) presented the Zurich prin-
ciples of biblical translation.66 Jud’s primary goal in translation

64 Biblia sacrosancta, α2v.
65 Biblia sacrosancta, α2v.
66 On imitation and exemplarity, see Ann Moss, Literary Imitation in the Sixteenth

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

23

was the promotion of virtue and true piety in the service of what
was useful to the many. According to the preface, he sought above
all to be faithful to the Hebrew, but was not »superstitious« in his
translation. This claim meant that he would translate the sense as
faithfully as possible without excessive attachment to the literal
meaning of words. For the most part he made use of plain lan-
guage, but there were other considerations. Well-known words of
Apostolic usage (such as Benedictus, gratia, etc), familiar to the
church and the people, were retained, reflecting a pastoral quality
to the translation.

This position, of course, had also been Erasmus’s. The preface
stressed the importance of plainness in translation, for ‘God hates
proud eloquence’, preferring holy moderation joined with religion
in speech.67 Such claims convey the ambivalent attitude towards
eloquence, which had to be used appropriately. Such an acknow-
ledgement of the difficulties in rendering of the original into Latin
led Bullinger to account for the annotations accompanying the
translation. As no one human translation could be flawless the
notes were presented to aid the reader to access the simplicity of
the biblical word. As a translator, Jud smoothed (»complanatio«)
out the bumps, filled in the holes. The Zurich Bible sought a bal-
ance between Latin that was easily accessible to its intended audi-
ence, the clergy, and fidelity to the original language. As one would
expect of humanist scholars the language of classical rhetoric is
evident. There is a particular emphasis on perspecuitas, the com-
prehensibility of individual words and of words joined together in
a sentence. The result was to be a text that was at once readable
and captured the literary forms of the Hebrew. The crucial word
was moderation (»mediocritas«).

Century: Writers and Readers, Latin and French, in: The Cambridge History of Literary
Criticism, 1st ed., vol. 3, Cambridge 1999, 107–118; Timothy Hampton, Writing from
History: The Rhetoric of Exemplarity in Renaissance Literature, Ithaca, NY 1990, par-
ticularly chapters 1 and 2; Izora Scott, Controversies over the Imitation of Cicero in the
Renaissance: With Translations of Letters between Pietro Bembo and Gianfrancesco
Pico »On Imitation« and a Translation of Desiderius Erasmus, »The Ciceronian (Cice-
ronianus)«, New York, NY 1910.

67 Biblia sacrosancta, α3r.

24

Bruce Gordon

Central to the preface was an account of Leo Jud’s death, which
involved a confession of faith and a commission to his fellow min-
isters. The Christological character of the confession is unmistak-
able:

»That Jesus Christ (he who is of one essence with the Father and the Holy
Spirit) is essentially God, but also true man, from God the father, following
his many promises, sent into the world, from the Holy Spirit in the body
and in the womb of the pure Virgin Mary received and born. He is the true
and expected Messiah, the one king, the great high priest, and redeemer of
the world, who though guiltless and without sin suffered for our sins, with
his precious blood washed us from our sins, and reconciled us with his
father, with his living, powerful resurrection brought us damned men to life
again in our nature and through our service.«68

This confession is an image of Zurich polity. The heart of the
translation work is Christ, who is to be found throughout the Old
Testament. The scene of Jud’s death represents the communal na-
ture of biblical scholarship. Gathered around the bed and under
the guidance of the Holy Spirit the brethren are admonished by a
dying colleague to continue the work. But something else highly
significant was taking place. The Zurichers were appropriating Jer-
ome. Whereas the church father had been the model of the single
scholar laboring aware in solitude, Jud was presented in the con-
text of communal biblical scholarship of the Swiss model. Jerome,
therefore, was sanctioning their work and their means of working.
Jud passed the baton to Theodor Bibliander to finish the Bible
project. Bibliander was charged with completing the last chapters
of Ezekiel, Daniel, Job, psalms 102–150, Ecclesiastes and Song of
Songs. Jud also requested that Konrad Pellikan review the work he
had done and supervise the publishing of the Bible.69

We have seen how Jerome was brought into the Zurich church,
but what of the Vulgate? It could not be ignored as it had played a
crucial part of the Prophezei from its inception. Bullinger respond-
ed to those who accused the Zurich church of undermining Jero-
me’s version.70 The preface assented to the idea that the authority
of the scriptures was inviolable in the Church but argued that the

68 Biblia sacrosancta, α3v.
69 Biblia sacrosancta, α4r.
70 Biblia sacrosancta, α4r.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

25

version of the Bible chosen to be used should be free. For author-
ity, it cited from the Decretal canon, as adapted from Augustine’s
letter to Jerome. »The loyalty of the old books to the Hebrew
volumes must be examined: so the truth of the Greek words de-
cides the norm of the new ones.«71 The governing principle was
fidelity to the original languages. On these grounds there was
room for another translation, for, according to the preface, the
Latin Vulgate version did not correspond to the Hebrew and Greek
in everything.

The Zurich scholars hammered home their central contention
that the early church possessed many translations of the Old and
New Testaments. Their appropriation of Jerome had multiple pur-
poses. As a translator of the Bible from Hebrew and Greek he was
not only a scholarly and devotional model, but the very historical
justification for their labours. Even though, according to Bullinger,
such fathers as Augustine, Cyprian, and Jerome knew Greek well
(although Augustine did not), there were, the preface maintained,
numerous editions of the New Testament. This claim was con-
firmed by Erasmus in his annotations.72 In Jerome’s time there was
no one Latin Bible in the Western Church that carried such author-
ity that he did not dare to attempt a new translation.

The matter was not so easily resolved. The relationship between
the Zurich Latin Bible and the Vulgate was complex. On the one
hand, the historical justification for a new Latin translation rested
on their argument that Jerome had not intended his Bible to be
authoritative in the Church. There was little doubt, on the other,
that the Vulgate was held in high esteem as the familiar Bible. The
Vulgate embodied tradition, and the Zurich churchmen were
struggling to position their humanist scholarship in relationship to
history. This ambivalence is evident when the preface addressed
the ticklish question of whether the Vulgate could still be regarded
as the work of Jerome. The Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers is
cited where Jerome wrote that he translated »the New Testament
with fidelity to the Greek and the Old Testament close to [iuxta]
the Hebrew«.73 Nevertheless, the preface continues, there remained

71 Biblia sacrosancta, α4v.
72 Biblia sacrosancta, α4v.
73 Biblia sacrosancta, α4v. The Catalogue was written by Epiphanius (310–403).

26

Bruce Gordon

some skepticism: »whether that version which is today received as
the Vulgate, and is called Jeromian [Hieronymiana], is the very
version that he mentioned, is not for us to say. Indeed his books
cry out against it not a little, especially his Questions (On Genesis)
or the Hebraic Traditions.«74 The Zurich scholars adopted the fa-
miliar line that Jerome’s own commentaries bear witness against
the veracity of the Vulgate, yet unlike Münster and others they
were not prepared to take a firm stance. This reflected the endur-
ing reverence for the Bible in Zurich, where great stock was placed
in historical continuity.

The preface returns to the question of multiple translations of
scripture and draws once more on Jerome’s words. The church
exercises its »liberty« in accepting and rejecting translations and
this privilege, according to the Zurich writers, is supported by Jer-
ome’s own remarks from the prefaces to his biblical commentaries.
From the preface to the Pentateuch – »What, therefore [...] do we
condemn the ancients? By no means! But after the studies of the
pious in the House of God we do what we are able, and we offer in
the tabernacle of God what we are able according to our portion
of strength, knowing that the riches of one does not sully the pov-
erty of others.«75 And from his preface to Job – »Let those who
will keep the old books with their gold and silver letters on purple
skins, or, to follow the ordinary phrase, in ›uncial characters‹,
loads of writing rather than manuscripts, if only they will leave for
me and mine, our poor pages and copies which are less remarkable
for beauty than for accuracy«.

Following these slightly oblique references to Jerome, the preface
turned to Augustine’s De doctrina Christiana (2 ch. 11), »most
certain is that the ancient churches of east and west used very
many and diverse copies and translations, which holily they did
not believe and assert to be of any harm to the churches, but of
great use.«76 No other book in the history of the world has drawn
as many outstanding scholars, who have translated, edited, and

74 Biblia sacrosancta, α4v. See Saint Jerome’s Hebrew Questions on Genesis, trans-
lated with Introduction and Commentary by C.T. Robert Hayward, Oxford 1995 (Ox-
ford Early Christian Studies).
75 Biblia sacrosancta, α5r.
76 Biblia sacrosancta, α5r.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

27

commented on it. This was true of eastern witnesses such Origen
and his Hexapla (six translations side by side), the Septuagint, and
the Editio communis. Those who complain about contemporary
translations do not know their church history. The church should
not demand that these translations agree word for word, for that
was not the case in the early church. It should suffice that they are
translated faithfully and do not differ in doctrine and religion
(»nostra religio«). This appeal for unity contained a troubling
note. The highly theological structure of the Zurich Bible, produ-
ced at a moment of great conflict within the Protestant churches,
made all too likely that other Bibles would not agree »in doctrine
and religion«.

Clearly the matter of the Vulgate was not resolved and the pref-
ace returned to the question and Jerome, »to follow his example«.
The Zurich scholars did not, they claimed, wish to quarrel with
others on account of their edition and version, nor had they sought
to slight Jerome in any way. Further they had not sought to decree
imperiously that that their version should be received and others
»spat out«. Those who do not like the Zurich Bible still have the
Vulgate, which »we do not condemn by our version at all, al-
though nevertheless we openly admit that it does not always and
everywhere agree with the truth of the Hebrew and Greek.«77 This
is very much the spirit of Bibliander; respect for the Vulgate was
coupled with a pervasive sense of superiority.

The remarks concerning the Vulgate anticipated a hostile reac-
tion to the translation, and the preface contained a plea for a gen-
tle reception, acknowledging that not everything was achieved in
this Bible. If it had fallen short in anyway, »it was in error, and not
a crime and they [the translators] should be corrected, not
damned.«78 They were always prepared to learn better, »for that
reason if anyone more felicitously, more learnedly, and more ter-
sely translates from the Hebrew into Latin the sacred books after
those translations of ours, we will not be envious, we will not
reprove, but we will approve rather of their faith and diligence,
giving thanks the Lord, who gives faithful and felicitous talents to

77 Biblia sacrosancta, α5r.
78 Biblia sacrosancta, α5v.

28

Bruce Gordon

his church.«79 The apology was common enough and such senti-
ments could be found in the biblical works of Erasmus and Sebas-
tian Münster. The words acquire a greater resonance when we
consider how isolated the Zurich church was in the early 1540s.
Repudiated by Luther and most of German Protestantism, Bullin-
ger and his colleagues had few allies.

The preface turned to the contents of the Bible and cited the
Expositio symboli of Cyprian as the authority for the order of the
books.80 The Expositio was actually by Rufinus Aquileia, whom
Erasmus identified as the author. In his 1521 edition of Cyprian (d.
258), Erasmus included an exposition of the Creed that he seems
to have attributed to the father.81 This attribution was erroneous
as the Expositio was, in fact, the work of Rufinus (340–410), who
in a passage where he treated the topic of inspiration listed the
books of the Bible.82 Both the Zurichers and Philipp Melanchthon
continued to attribute the work to Cyprian, perhaps as a subtle
criticism of Erasmus.83 Whatever the case, the order of books
found in the Expositio was employed by the Zurich scholars. In
the Biblia sacrosancta the Pentateuch is followed by the history
books, the major and minor prophets, Job, Psalms and the three
books of Solomon (Ecclesiastes, Proverbs, Song of Songs).

As for the annotations, the preface provides a detailed account
of how they had been prepared. Leo Jud wrote the marginal sum-
maries for the books he translated, a task completed by Theodor
Bibliander following Jud’s death. Compared to the Old Testament
of Sebastian Münster, the marginal annotations for the 1543 Bible
are much lighter, but by no means insignificant. According to the
Zurich translators their purpose was twofold: to provide variant
readings and to elucidate the meaning of the authors. They offered

79 Biblia sacrosancta, α5v.
80 Biblia sacrosancta, α5v.
81 Opera divi Caecilii Cypriani episcopi Carthaginensis, ab innumeris mendis repur-
gata, adiectis nonnullis libellis ex vetustissimis exemplaribus, quae hactenus non ha-
bebantur, ac semotis iis, quae falso videbantur inscripta, una cum annotatiunculis, Ba-
sel: Johann Froben, 1520.

82 Opera divi Caecilii Cypriani, 382.
83 Timothy J. Wengert, Philip Melanchthon’s Last Word to Cardinal Lorenzo Cam-
peggio, Papal Legate at the 1530 Diet of Augsburg, in: Irene Dingel et al., Philip Me-
lanchthon: Theologian in Classroom, Confession, and Controversy, Göttingen 2012
(Refo500 Academic Studies 7), 222.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

29

occasion for a fuller consideration of the text and even a justifi-
cation (»ratio«) of the translation,84 though, the preface continues,
»we dare to promise that only a few annotations will be after the
manner of a very lengthy commentary.«

Of particular interest is the system behind the annotations and
the way in which it informs us as to how the Bible was to be read.
The description of the annotations above applies to the material in
the outer margin, which was provided by Jud and Bibliander. On
the inside margin we find the work of Konrad Pellikan, who had
been charged with editing the whole Bible. Pellikan sought to draw
attention to themes that were particularly memorable and notable
(»memorabilia« and »observanda«). A series of »loci communes«
formed a »concordantia« by which obscure passages might be
compared with clearer ones. According to the preface Pellikan’s
approach was also based on Augustine’s teaching in De doctrina
Christiana in which he treated scripture interpreting scripture.85
Pellikan’s annotations consisted of brief thematic phrases and par-
allel biblical references that formed a theological reading of the
Bible. The reader is directed to other passages in scripture that
treat the same theme.

The two sets of marginal notes guide the reader in different
ways. On the outer margin are the chapter summaries and notes
that refer to (»alii legunt«) the Vulgate, the Septuagint, and Sebas-
tian Münster’s translation, demonstrating that the Zurich Bible
was in conversation with these editions. These annotations also
contain references to Hebrew words and offer more literal rende-
ring of the original. It is here also that one finds historical infor-
mation that illuminates the context of the passage. Only rarely
does one encounter theological comment. The book of Isaiah is
one place where theology makes its way into the outer margin
annotations as there are numerous references to Christ and the
Church. In addition to grammatical and historical information the
Zurich scholars had great interest in the rhetorical nature of the
Bible and a particular delight in demonstrating where classical
rhetorical forms were to be found in scripture. This focus corre-

84 Biblia sacrosancta, α6r.
85 Biblia sacrosancta, α6r.

30

Bruce Gordon

sponded to Bullinger’s second preface, which defended the Bible as
a sophisticated piece of writing that surpasses all the works of
antiquity in its articulation of wisdom.

The inner margin annotations, the work of Pellikan, were entire-
ly theological in nature. As noted, they provided a system for re-
ading the text through the use of »loci communes« and parallel
passages. Further, pithy theological and pastoral statements are
offered, intended to aid the clergy in study and the preparation of
sermons. The Bible became a theological textbook whose foun-
dation was expressed in the Compendium. The two sets of mar-
ginal notes tell us a great deal about the character of the Zurich
Bible. In the two margins we find the attempt to balance humanist
learning with doctrine; the former in the service of the latter. Un-
like Münster’s Bible, the first major work of Protestant translation
of scripture into Latin, which invited multiple readings, the Zurich
Bible was shaped by the material on the inside margin, which was
referenced to the prefatory writings. Both in the way in which the
Bible was set out for the reader and in the language chosen by the
translators, clear theological decisions had been made.

The preface has remarkably little to say about the New Testa-
ment other than to inform the reader that the text was based on
Erasmus’ (»beatissimae memoriae magnus«) last edition of 1535.
The Dutch humanist’s annotations had been slightly emended as a
result of consultation with other editions, work done by Peter
Cholinus and Rudolph Gwalther.86 Gwalther was solely respon-
sible for all the chapter summaries (»argumenta«) as well as the
annotations from Acts 14 to the end of the work. The rest he did
with others. What was said earlier about the Old Testament was
repeated for the New: that there was no wish to impugn the Vul-
gate with this edition. »Should the Vulgate still be read in schools
of theology, and the churches, and alone cited in sacred assemblies,
there is no objection here.«87 In common with other translators of
the Bible in the sixteenth century the Zurichers had no doubt that
their work would be criticized by others, but in this respect they
would suffer as Jerome did.

86 Biblia sacrosancta, α6v.
87 Biblia sacrosancta, α6v.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

31

De operis huius institutio et ratione provided the historical and
linguistic justification for the Zurich Latin Bible. Through its ap-
propriation of Jerome and Augustine it located itself in the biblical
world of the early church, shaped by the influence of Erasmus. We
find the Zurich church attempting to address several issues con-
currently. How was Hebrew to be translated into Latin? What was
the place of rabbinic sources? And how was humanist learning to
be balanced by doctrinal fidelity? To understand the character of
the Zurich response to these pressing questions of the early refor-
mation De operis has to be read together with the other prefatory
material with which it was placed in the Bible, and we shall briefly
turn to these texts.

De omnibus scripturae sanctae, referred to in the first preface as
the »Expositio«, was written by Bullinger for the 1539 Zurich
Latin Bible and revised and somewhat expanded for the 1543
translation. Having established the historical authority of biblical
translations in the first preface, Bullinger turned to the nature of
scripture itself. His arguments echo those found in his De scrip-
turae sanctae authoritate (1538), which he dedicated to Henry
VIII. The tone of the preface is aggressive and almost polemical as
Bullinger attacked those (unnamed) persons who regard scripture
as inferior to the great works of classical literature. The quarrel is
difficult to place, but it may well have concerned a disagreement
among printers in Basel, who were publishing classical texts. Bul-
linger followed Juan de Vives (whom he cites) in his assault on
Aristotle. Cicero appears as a witness for the prosecution and de-
fence as Bullinger invoked the great Roman’s authority both as an
example of vain knowledge and as a guide to true rhetoric. The
position that emerged reflected the educational system developed
in Zurich; the liberal arts were not to be understood as an end in
and of themselves, but as preparation for the study of scripture.88
The prefatory material concludes with a Compendium et scopus
totius sacrae scripturae. This work is a twelve article confession of
faith that forms the theological heart of the Zurich Bible. The

88 Anja-Silvia Göing, Die Ausbildung reformierter Prediger in Zürich 1531–1575:
Vorstellung eines pädagogischen Projekts, in: Bildung und Konfession: Theologenaus-
bildung im Zeitalter der Konfessionalisierung, ed. Herman J. Selderhuis and Markus
Wriedt, Tübingen 2006 (Spätmittelalter und Reformation NS 27), 293–310.

32

Bruce Gordon

articles were a summary of what the Old Testament and New Tes-
tament teach (»docent«) laid out in a theological order that mir-
rored Bullinger’s other works. In the outer margin are the theo-
logical topoi, such as »Deus trinus et unus«, »homo«, »peccatum«,
»ira, mors et damnatio«, etc. On the inside margin the reader finds
the relevant scriptural references from the Old and New Testa-
ments. The articles are extensive and take the reader through the
whole of salvation history. For example, the Christological reading
of the Old Testament is clearly evident in the fifth paragraph:

»But we learn by the books of the New Testament that the promised Christ
(who is above all things God forever blessed and adumbrated and figured
by sacrifices in the books of Old Testament) was at last sent by the Father,
at that time, which he had established by his own council and had foretold
in the prophets, at that time in which every evil was abounding. But he was
sent, and made incarnate, and died and was raised from the dead, so that
not on account of good works (for we were all sinners), but truly so that he
might exhibit the abundant riches of his grace which he had promised and
so that he might save us according to his mercy.«89

The Compendium was crucial to the reading of the Bible. It was
intended as proof that the teaching of the Zurich church was
grounded in scripture alone, and as such it determined the essential
pedagogical nature of the Bible. The reader was to be instructed in
true doctrine through the reading of scripture and the marginal
notes provided by the apparatus. The parallel biblical references
led to the Compendium, where the reader received instruction.
Further, there is a strong correlation between the theological topoi
provided alongside the articles and those used by Pellikan in the
text. This system of referencing brought the reader to the theo-
logical teaching of the Zurich churchmen.

The Zurich Latin Bible of 1543 had multiple purposes. As a
book for the wider church, it declared the historical lineage, bibli-
cal scholarship, and doctrinal soundness of the Zurich Reforma-
tion. At home, it served as an essential tool for the training of
clergy. Above all, however, it was intended to demonstrate the
unitive nature of the Zurich church under Heinrich Bullinger. It
was a book that embodied the institutional vision of the man who

89 Biblia sacrosancta, γ5r.

Remembering Jerome and Forgetting Zwingli

33

succeeded Huldrych Zwingli. He prosecuted reform with a firm
hand. Scholarship was to be united with piety, the intellectual rig-
our of Jerome the translator was united with the pastoral concerns
of Augustine the bishop. The Biblia sacrosancta, through its me-
thods of translation, moved between the extremes of the literal and
overly Ciceronian. In all things moderation, reflecting Bullinger’s
desire to stabilize and define the Zurich. Most importantly, text
and paratext demonstrated the scriptural foundation of Zurich’s
theology.

In its material form the Biblia sacrosancta embodied the restored
church in Zurich. The pages themselves reflected Bullinger’s ideal
of the right worship of God. With their clean Roman type and
sparse annotations, the pages of the Biblia revealed Zurich’s litur-
gical aesthetic of drawing the undistracted eye to the physical ap-
pearance of the Word, just as with presence of the table and pulpit
at the front of whitewashed churches. The Biblia was the ecclesia.
Scholarship and doctrine came together in a book shaped by mem-
ory and forgetting. The Biblia sacrosancta of 1543 gave the Zurich
church a past and a patron, Jerome. It provided a model of doc-
trine and piety for home and across the Reformation world. There
was, however, a price. Zurich could only have its Bible and church
by remaining silent about the man who had begun its reformation.

Bruce Gordon, Ph.D, Titus Street Professor of Ecclesiastical History, Yale Divinity
School, Yale University, USA

Abstract: In 1543 the Zurich reformers produced Latin translations of the Old Testa-
ment and the Apocrypha together with a revised edition of Erasmus’ New Testament.
The Biblia sacrosancta was a beautiful volume, Froschauer’s finest work. The work on
the Old Testament was primarily done by Leo Jud, though it was completed by Theodor
Bibliander and Konrad Pellikan after his death in 1542. The translation, together with
the textual apparati, and the extensive prefaces form the most complete expression of
the theological and ecclesiastical vision of the Zurich church under Heinrich Bullinger.
Printed twelve years after the death of Huldrych Zwingli, the Bible embodied the ideals
of a restored church that had to turn its back on its fallen founder. Zwingli was never
mentioned and the model for a new, proud, and confident church was St Jerome,
represented in the figure of the translator Leo Jud. This essay explores the relationship
between biblical interpretation, identity, and church building for the second generation
of the Reformation.

Keywords: Heinrich Bullinger, Leo Jud, Konrad Pellikan, Theodor Bibliander, Biblia
Sacrosancta, Latin Bible, Translation, Hebrew, Zurich

