A  Baptist  Perspective  on  Zwingli 

von  H.  WAYNE  PIPKIN 

It will  certainly  seem  stränge  to  many, but  in  celebrating  the  500th  anniversary 
of  the  birth  of  Zwingli,  I  believe  I  am  celebrating  the  origins  of  my  own  Spir(cid:173)
itual heritage. Much  of who we are as Baptists is directly and  indirectly  traceable 
back  to  the  Zürich  reformer  and  we  are  indebted  to  him  in  ways  we  do  not 
even  recognize. 

I will point out in this article what  I believe to be the  areas wherein  the  influ-
ence  of  Zwingli  is  positively  experienced  among  Baptists  as  well  as  where  we 
Baptitsts  clearly  disagree  with  Zwingli.  Finally,  I  shall  mention  briefly  some 
places  where  we  have  not  heard  Zwingli  well  enough.  I  should  be  very  clear  at 
the  beginning  that  although  I speak  as a  Baptist,  I  do  not  in  any way  speak  for 
Baptists.1 

Baptists  are  a  free  church,  believer's  church  people.  Our  historical  roots  lie 
both  in the  radical, left-wing  reformation(s)  of the  sixteenth  and  in the  Separatist 
and  Puritan  movements  of the  seventeenth  Century.2  Zwingli  played  an  import-
ant  role  in  the  formation  and  shaping  of  the  nature  of  both  movements. 
Thereby  was  Zwingli's  contribution  to  Baptists  mediated. 

The  Imprint  of  Zwingli  on  Baptists 

There  are  several  basic  distinctive  elements  of  Baptist  thinking  and  practice 
which  bear  the  imprint  of  Zwingli, or which  we  at  least  share  in  common  with 
Zwingli. 

The  most  significant  shared  belief  is  the  importance  of  Scripture.  As  was 

Zwingli,  so  are  Baptists, as a  rule,  biblicists. 

There  is no  need  to  repeat  here  what  is well-known  about  Zwingli  himself. I 
will  confine  myself  to  a few  of  the  evidences  of  his  biblicism  that  find  an  echo 
among  Baptists. 

When  Zwingli  in  1522  affirmed  the  following  concerning  God's  word,  he 

1  This Observation can be made by the member of any Christian confession, but the di-
versity  among  Baptists  is bewildering. According  to  David Barret,  World  Christian 
Encyclopedia, Nairobi 1982, 818, among the specific traditions of Protestants who call 
themselves  Baptists, there are some 369 denominations which are expected  to num-
ber 50, 321, 900 persons in 1985. 

2  A Standard  history  of the  Baptists is Robert G.  Torbet, A History  of  the  Baptists, 3rd 

edition, Valley Forge, Pennsylvania, 1963. 

239 

was  asserting  the  authority  of  Scripture  in  terms  that  most  Baptists  would  ac-
cept: 

So mögend  wir ie in  sinem wort nit  irren, wir mögen  nit abgon, nit  gefelscht, 
nit  getödet  noch  ermürdet  werden  in  sinem  wort.  Meinstu  nit  ietz  din  sei 
würt  gsichret  -  hör  die  Sicherheit  des  worts  gottes  -?  Si  würt  bericht  und 
erlüchtet  -  hör  die clarheit -,  das sy verstat  all ir heyl, all ir grechtigheit  oder 
frommwerden  in  Christo Jesu  verschlossen  sin,  ja  gewüsslich  getrost,  das  jr 
nüt  by  im  abgeschlagen  möge  werden,  so  er  sy  von  im  selbs  so  gnädiklich 
ladt  unnd  berufft.3 

The  word  of  God  is  for  Baptists  the  only  authoritative  rule.  Baptists  have 
over the years  refused  to set down  in  any authoritative  confession  what  must  be 
believed,  or  what  the  Gospel  truth  for  belief  and  practice  is.  They  have  pu-
blished  confessions  of  faith,  a  slightly  different  medium  than  a  creed,  but  one 
that  makes  all  the  difference  in  the  world  to  Baptists. When  pressed  on  the  is-
sue,  Baptists  are  likely  to  say, "we  have  no  creed  but  the  Bible". 

With  Zwingli, Baptists  affirm  that we will not  err  if we  depend  on  Scripture. 
Those  radical  opponents  of  Zwingli  who  later  became  the  Täufer,  learned  their 
lessons well from  him.  It was the  Scripture  that was the  authoritative  guide. The 
difference  was to come  in exactly how and  when  it was to be applied, but  that  it 
was  to  be  the  basis  of  true  religion  was  never  in  doubt. 

In  1644, seven  Baptist congregations  in  London  published  what  became  one 
of  the  most  influential  Baptist  Statements,  "The  Confession  of  Faith,  of  those 
Churches  which  are  Commonly  (though  falsly)  called Anabaptists."4  This  "Lon(cid:173)
don  Confession",  as it is commonly  called,  contained  the  same  kind  of  affirma-
tions concerning  Scripture  found  in  Zwingli. It is a strong affirmation  of  author(cid:173)
ity  tempered  by  a  Christological  and  soteriological  perspective.  Articles  seven 
and  eight  illustrate  this: 

The  Rule  of  this  Knowledge,  Faith, and  Obedience,  concerning  the  worship 
and  service  of  God,  and  all  other  Christian  duties,  is  not  mans  inventions, 
opinions,  devices,  lawes,  constitutions,  or  traditions  unwritten  whatsoever, 
but  onely  the  word  of  God  contained  in  the  Canonicall  Scriptures. 

In  this written  Word  God  hath  plainly  revealed  whatsoever  he  hath  thought 
needfull  for  us  to  know  beleeve, and  acknowledge,  touching  the  Nature  and 
Office  of Christ, in whom  all the  promises  are Yea and Amen  to the  praise of 
God.5 

3  Z I 3 7 21 9_2 6. 
4  W. L.  Lumpkin,  Baptist  Confessions  of  Faith,  Valley  Forge,  Pennsylvania,  1969, 

153-171. 

5  Lumpkin 158. 

240 

I am  not  suggesting  here  that  this confession  is in  any  self-conscious  way di(cid:173)
rectly  based  on  Zwingli.  It  is, however,  indicative  of  the  wide  agreement  in  the 
matter  of  Scripture  between  Zwingli  and  the  seventeenth  Century  Baptists.  Set-
ting  the  word  of  God  over  against  "man's  inventions,  opinions,  devices,  laws, 
constitutions"  is  worthy  of  Zwingli  himself.  It  is  entirely  reminiscent  of 
Zwingli's  consistent  contrasting of  false  religion  based  on  human  opinions  with 
the  true  religion  that  is based  on  Scripture  alone.6  For  Baptists, as  for  Zwingli, 
the  Scriptures  were  the  authoritative  center  of  Christian  faith.  The  "Second 
London  Confession"  of  1677  stated  further  the  affirmation,  "The  Holy  Scrip(cid:173)
ture  is  the  only  sufficient,  certain,  and  infallible  rule  of  all  saving  Knowledge, 
Faith,  and  Obedience."7 

Zwingli  well  knew  that  in  addition  to  the  authority  and  sufficiency  of  Scrip(cid:173)
ture  it  was  necessary  to  interpret  the  Bible.  In  his  sermon,  "Von  Klarheit  und 
Gewißheit  des  Wortes  Gottes",  he  addressed  himself  at  length  to  this  matter. 
He  encourages  his  readers  to  seek  the  "mind  of  the  Spirit."8  One  must  turn  to 
God  for  the  Interpretation  and  this  means  to  let  Scripture  be  the  Interpreter  of 
Scripture.9  It  is a Baptist  principle  as well. Again,  the  "Second  London  Confes(cid:173)
sion"  speaks  to  the  matter: 

We  acknowledge  the  inward  illumination  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  be  neces(cid:173)
sary  for  the  saving  understanding  of  such  things  as  are  revealed  in  the 
Word...10 

The  infallible  rule  of  Interpretation  of  Scripture  is  the  Scripture  itself.11 

The  agreement  on  the  principle  of the  necessity  and  means  of  the  Interpreta(cid:173)

tion  of  Scripture  are  remarkably  similar.  Later,  the  radicals  will  utilize  the  very 
same approach  as Zwingli  is suggesting, but will come  to radically different  con-
clusions  as  to  what  the  Spirit  is  saying. To  this  point,  however,  the  similarities 
are  greater  than  the  differences.12 

The  matter  of interpretation  calls to mind  another  significant  contribution  of 
Zwingli  to  the  Reformation:  his  preaching  methodology  and  his  means  of  pre-

6  Cf. Z  I 289 3-6, 300  13_15i 317  n_I4i Z  II 51 16_21, 76 ia.21, 78 ,_9; Z  III 670 „-671  ,, 674 2,_24 
7  Lumpkin  248. 
8  Z  I 381 15. 
9  ZI3812 I_2 6. 
10  Lumpkin  250. 
11  Lumpkin  25lf. 
12  "The  Bible  must  be  interpreted.  But  we  have  for  our  illumination  in  interpreting  the 
same  Spirit  who  inspired  it.  Everything  in  the  Bible  is not  equally  binding  on  us, be-
cause wicked  men  speak, Pharaoh, Judas, the  devil. We  must get God's  message  by in(cid:173)
terpreting  under  the  Spirit's  guidance."  E.  Y. Mullins,  Baptist  Beliefs,  Valley  Forge, 
Pennsylvania,  1912, 15. 

241 

paring  preachers.  When  Zwingli  began  his  ministry  in  Zürich  by  preaching 
straight  through  Matthew  and  following  that  by  proceeding  right  through 
several  other  New  Testament  writings, he  was  making  a  significant  innovation. 
By departing  from  the  slavish  commitment  to  preaching  only  on  the  pericopes 
for  the  day, he  was  allowing  the  Scripture  more  directly  to  speak  to  the  every-
day  Situation  of  his  hearers  in  Zürich.  This  approach  was different  from  that of 
Luther  and  his  followers  who  remained  bound  by  the  lectionary  ever  after. 
Baptists,  however,  have  adopted  the  Zwinglian  approach  and  to  this  day,  it  is 
typical  for  Baptist  preachers  to  give  consecutive  exposition  of  whole  books  of 
the  Bible  a  high  priority. 

The  education  of  clergy  and,  ultimately,  the  laity  through  the  Prophezei in 
Zürich  had  far-reaching  consequences  as  well.  Certainly  this  approach  must 
have  spread  far  throughout  the  Reformed  areas  and  it  certainly  had  its  impact 
on  the  Puritans.  Baptists  were  among  those  descendants  of  Zwingli  who  have 
stressed  the  importance  of  the  study of  biblical  languages. Until  today  linguistic 
competence  is a typical  characteristic  of a trained  Baptist pastor. Allied with  this 
have been  various  Baptist-inspired  or led translations  of the  Bible and  of  various 
commentaries  on  the  Bible. In  no  small  way  is  the  Zwinglian  legacy  kept  alive 
here  among  Baptists. 

Baptists  are  also  indebted  to  Zwingli,  though  perhaps  indirectly,  for  their 
sacramental  views. This fact  is more  complicated  than  it appears on  the  surface, 
however.  In  the  first  place,  the  Täufer  and  the  Baptists  were  and  are  more  in(cid:173)
debted  to  Zwingli  in  the  matter  of  baptism  than  is  generally  recognized.  The 
fact  is, Zwingli  desacralized  baptism  and  thereby  laid  the  basis  for  the  radical 
Position.13  If in fact  baptism  is not  necessary  to remit  both  the guilt and  penalty 
of  original  sin, then  the  way is prepared  to  have  it  emerge  as a symbolic  enact-
ing of  the  Christian's  death  to  sin  and  the  resurrection  from  death.14  The  Bapt(cid:173)
ist theologian  E. Y.Mullins  put  it thus: "Baptism  confers  no  spiritual  but  only a 
symbolic  remission  of  sins."15  The  question  of  the  baptism  of  infants  as  over 
against  adult  believers  Signals  a  greater  difference  than  a  question  of  baptism 
only  and  will  be  mentioned  below. 

In  the  matter  of  the  eucharist,  Baptists  tend  to  be  the  sacramentarians  that 
Zwingli  was  accused  of  being,  but  really  was  not.  In  this  sense,  it  is  true  that 
Zwingli was not  a Zwinglian, but  Baptists are, as a rule. Here  again  it is  difficult 
to  generalize,  for  many  Baptists  would  be  clearly  Calvinist  in  their  eucharistic 

13  This point is made well in the paper by the Baptist scholar,  Timothy George, "The Pre-

suppositions of Zwingli's Baptismal Theology", which is to appear in the  forthcoming 
Symposium  edited  by E.J. Furcha and  H, Wayne Pipkin, Prophet,  Pastor,  Protestant; 
the work of Huldrych Zwingli after Five hundred years, Pittsburgh 1984. 

14  Michael Sattler, "Brüderliche Vereinigung", art. 1, in: Quellen zur Geschichte der Täu(cid:173)

fer in der Schweiz II, Zürich  1973, 26. 

15  Mullins 69. 

242 

views.16 The  seventeenth  Century  Baptist  confessions  show  signs  of  the  Zwing-
lian  influence  and  reveal  typical  Zwinglian  concerns  for  the  Lord's  Supper  as 
memorial  and  some  mention  of  the  spiritual  encounter  with  Christ  in  the  sup(cid:173)
per  is  mentioned. 

In  this  ordinance  Christ  is not  offered  up  to  his  Father, nor  any  real  sacrifice 
made  at all, for remission  of  sin  of  the  quick  or dead; but  only a memorial of 
that one offering  up  of himself, by himself, upon  the  cross, once  for all; and a 
spiritual  oblation  of  all  possible  praise  unto  God  for  the  same.17 

Worthy  receivers,  outwardly  partaking  of  the  visible  Elements  in  this  Ordi(cid:173)
nance, do  then  also inwardly  by  faith,  really  and  indeed  yet not  camally,  and 
corporally,  but  spiritually  receive, and  feed  upon  Christ  crucified  and  all  the 
benefits  of  his  death....18 

Many  North  American  Baptists would  carry  Zwingli's  desacralization  further 
and  refuse  even  to  call these  practices  sacraments; rather, they  are  ordinances.19 
Another  dimension  of  the  thinking  of  Zwingli  that  emerged  in  the  Täufer 
and  in  the  Baptists  as  well,  was  the  strong  emphasis  on  the  practical  side  of 
Christianity.  Clearly  Zwingli  was  concerned  about  the  quality  of  the  Christian 
life  as it was to be lived  in  Zürich. Although  his was not  a "believer's  church"  in 
the  sense  of  a "gathered  church",  he  was very  much  concerned  with  the  life  of 
the  believer  as authentic  Christian.20  The  concern  for  discipline  and  for  main-
taining the  Christian witness was a typical feature  of  the Täufer  and the  Baptists, 
as is well known. The  role of  the  ban  or excommunication  appeared  typically  in 
Täufer  writings  as  did  the  attention  to  the  importance  of  maintaining  disci(cid:173)
pline.21  One  finds  the  concern  clearly  in  Puritanism  and  it is not  at  all  missing 
in  Baptists.22  The  major  difference  between  Zwingli  and  his  Täufer/Baptist 
brothers  and  sisters  at  this  point  centers  on  the  role  of  the  State in  the  enforce-
ment  of  discipline. 

One  last  motif  bears  mentioning.  Gottfried  W. Locher in  various  places  has 
noted  the  tradition  of  "public  Service" which  has  exercised  considerable  influ(cid:173)
ence.23  It  may  be  too  much  to  lay  this  wholly  at  Zwingli's  feet,  but  it  is  clear 

16  Brooks Hays and John E. Steely, The Baptist Way of Life, Macon, Georgia, 2nd revised 

edition, 1981,79. 

17  Lumpkin 291t. 
18  Lumpkin 293. 
19  MullinslOi. 
20  There  are  numerous  writings  in  which  this  concern  of  Zwingli  emerges, but  I am 

thinking primarily of his sermon "Der Hirt", Z III  5-68. 

21  Quellen (Anm. 14) 165; II 29, 151, 466; III  115f. 
22  Lumpkin 168. 
23  Gottfried W.Locher, Huldrych Zwingli in neuer Sicht, Zürich  1969, 54, 170. 

243 

that  the  seeds  are  at  least  implicitly  there. There  is  a clear  socio-political  motif 
in  Zwingli's  thinking  as well  as in  his  life. As these  motifs  were  mediated  along 
with  a  covenant  theology  to  Holland  and  the  Anglo-Saxon  world,  they  were 
taken  up  by  many,  including  Baptists, who  at  many  points  combine  the  secre-
tarian  inclinations  of  many  sixteenth  Century  Täufer  with  the  sense  of  respon-
sibility  for  the  world  of  Zwingli. Among  Baptists  it  is  usually  translated  into  a 
sense  of  personal  responsibility  growing  out  of  the  personal  regeneration  expe-
rienced  in  Christ. 

Baptists  believe  in  every  form  of  righteousness:  Personal  righteousness  or 
right  living  in  individual  contact;  domestic  righteousness  or  right  living  in 
the  home; civic righteousness  or right living in the  State; social  righteousness 
or  right  living  in  society;  commercial  righteousness  or  right  living  in  busi-
ness. This  demand  for  righteousness  in  all  spheres  is the  direct  result  of  the 
doctrine  of  regeneration.  The  new  birth  affects  the  whole  person  in  all  rela-
tionships. No Baptist, therefore,  can  be indifferent  to movements  for the  im-
provement  or  purification  of  life  anywhere.24 

The  difference  between  Zwingli  and  the  Baptists at this point  is that  Baptists 
have  a  less  sanguine  view  of  the  possible  effectiveness  of  the  government  in 
these  matters. Also,  Baptists  tend  to  be  more  reluctant  to  allow  the  church  as 
such  to  make  pronouncements  on  the  wide  ränge  of  social  issues. 

Baptist  Critique  of  Zwingli 

The  critique  of  Zwingli  by  Baptists  is  perhaps  easy  to  understand  and  one  will 
be  more  familiär  with  it.  One  needs  nonetheless  to  hear  what  the  Baptist  and 
Täufer  response  to  Zwingli  is. 

The  first  judgement  one  encounters  of  Zwingli  is  that  he  stopped  short  in 
his  reformation,  that  he  did  not  carry  to  the  logical  conclusion  the  reform  he 
had  begun.  Hays  and  Steely, from  a Baptist  perspective,  describe  the  Anabaptist 
critique  well: 

Zwingli's  earlier  sermons  and  declarations  appeared  to  embody  the  same 
ideals  that  these  Anabaptists  held,  and  they  relied  on  him  to  carry  through 
the  reform  of  the  Church  with  vigor. To  their  dismay,  however,  he  stopped 
short  of  the  implementation  of  his  principles,  and  the  Anabaptists  feit  con-
strained  to  denounce  him  and  to  proceed  on  their  own  initiative  to  the 
establishment  of  true  reform.  This  meant,  in  their  view,  an  actual  reforma-

24  Mullins  76-77. 

244 

tion  of  the  Church  to  include  only  regenerate  members  who  had  been  bap-
tized  on  the  basis  of  a  personal  confession  of  faith.25 

A  more  telling  critique  of  Zwingli  lies  in  the  recognition  that  he  was  not 
willing  to  extend  to  the  Täufer  those  freedoms  he  wanted  for  himself.  In  "Der 
Hirt"  Zwingli  asserted,  "das  Christus  nit  wil, mit  gwalt  ieman  zu  dem  glouben 
bezwungen  werden...  damit  alle  krafft  und  eer  gott  und  sinem  wort 
heymköme".26  This  is a noble  principle  which  Zwingli  was in  the  final  analysis 
not  able  fully  to  follow  through  on. 

One  can  understand  the  necessity  with  which  Zwingli  found  himself  con-
fronted  in  trying to  insure  that  the  reformation  be  saved. We  do  question,  how-
ever, whether  it needed  to be saved at all costs. Does the  end  justify  the  means? 
One  can  also not  avoid  the  Suggestion  that  at  this  telling  point,  and  perhaps 
even  more  so later on  in  his  confrontations  with  the  Catholics  of  inner  Switzer-
land, Zwingli  departed  from  his professed  intention  to depend  on  the  Spirit  and 
that  by  trusting  in  his  own  initiative  as well  as  the  power  of  the  temporal  gov-
ernment  he was turning  from  the  Creator to the  creature and  thereby was guilty 
of  false  rather  than  true  religion. 

In  some  sense  Zwingli, as the  other  mainline  reformers,  must  bear  a part of 
the  responsibility  for  later  excesses  that  emerged  in  the  radical  reformatory 
movements.  With  the  deaths  of  leaders  such  as  Manz  and,  later,  of  Hubmaier, 
the  left-wing  movements  lost men  who were responsible, thereby  making  space 
for  less  able  and  less  responsible  leaders.27 

Baptists  are  strong  proponents  of  religious  liberty,  of  human  rights  and  of 
the  Separation  of  church  and  State. This  is not  the  place  to give a litany of  Bapt(cid:173)
ist  charges  against  Zwingli  and  his  followers.  It  must  be  mentioned,  however, 
that  the  contribution  of  the  Zürich  reformer  here  was  unfortunate  and  that  it 
has  borne  fruits  of  discrimination  even  unto  the  present  day. 

One  should  mention  also  the  Baptist  critique  of  Zwingli  on  the  matter  of 
baptism,  which  centers  basically  around  two  issues.  First,  it  is  believed  that 
Zwingli's  exegesis at the  point  of  his defense  of  infant  baptism  is weak.28  Secon-
dly,  he  divorces  baptism  from  repentance  and  from  faith.  These  were  the  dis-
coveries or contributions  of  the Täufer.  This has implications  for  the  church,  for 
pedobaptism  unavoidably  opens  the  door to the  nominal  Christian.  Baptists  un-
derstandably  believe  that  one  is  not  born  into  the  church,  but  that  one  is  re-
born  into  it. 

25  Hays  and  Steely 10. 
26  Z  III  38 12_16. 
27  Hays and  Steely 10. 
28  Timothy  George, op. cit. 

245 

What  Baptists  Need  to  Hear  from  Zwingli 

There  is at  least  one  motif  in  the  thinking  and  reforming  work  of  Zwingli  that 
Baptists  need  yet  to  hear.  Here  I  speak  very  much  as  a  Baptist  who  has  found 
concerns  of  the  reformer  that  are  entirely  appropriate  for  the  life  of  the  Chris(cid:173)
tian  today, but  concerns  that  have  been  all  too  often  neglected. 

The  socio-political  motif  need  not  simply  issue  in an  unthinking  alliance be-
tween  church  and  State or church  and  culture. Zwingli  evidenced  in his  reform(cid:173)
ing work  a concern  for  the  whole  life  of  the  Community,  and  not  just  for  indi-
viduals. We  Baptists  have  tended  to  be  sectarian. Often  this  has been  a  reaction 
against  finding  ourselves  the  minority.  There  is inherent  in  Zwinglian  thought 
an  understanding  that  God  is related  to  the  social  order  and  that  it is an  appro(cid:173)
priate  arena  for  the  action  of  the  Christian.  Given  the  realities  of  the  present 
world, this particular  insight  of  Zwingli  may be  one  of  the  most  important  gifts 
we  can  receive. 

In  conclusion  I want  to  mention  that  I welcome  the  willingness  of  Zwingli 
scholars and  churchmen  to  consider the  strengths and weaknesses  of Zwingli  in 
this year of his quinquecentennial. There  has been  little need  to glorify  the  man 
at the  expense  of  recognizing  his limitations. As a Baptist  Christian  and  a histo-
rian, I am willing to forgive  both  my own  past and  the  limitations  present in  the 
life  and  work  of  this  very  human  reformer.  There  is  much  good  and  many 
strengths  to  be  found  in  the  study  of  Huldrych  Zwingli  and  I  gratefully  cele-
brate  them  on  this  occasion. 

Prof. Dr. H. Wayne  Pipkin,  Baptistische  Theologische  Hochschule,  Gheistraße  31, CH-
8803  Rüschlikon 

246 

