ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 38 (2011), 153–173

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

An Attempt to Disseminate Political and

Religious Freedom through Books

in the 18 th Century1

Urs B. Leu

Thomas Hollis2 was born in 1720 in London as the only child of
his parents and »was the fifth and last of that name, the descen-
dant and heir of a tribe of wealthy and successful manufactures
and merchants, Dissenters in religion and Old Whigs in politics.«3
He passed Schools and Colleges until 1748. By then, at age 28, as a
wealthy young man, because he had inherited from his uncle, his
father and his grandfather, he undertook two Grand Tours
through Europe, where he met famous French philosophers and
several Italian painters. He returned in 1753 to England and be-
came a member of the Society of Arts, of the Society of Antiquaries
and of the Royal Society. In 1754 he started on what he called his
»great plan«: the distribution and reprinting of titles of the seven-
teenth-century republican canon, among them the works of John
Locke, Henry Neville, Algernon Sidney and above all the prose

1 This is the written version of my paper given as 93rd Winship Lecture at Hough-
ton Library, Harvard University (April 6, 2010). I thank Prof. Dr. Ann Blair (History
Department), William P. Stoneman and Dennis Marnon (both Houghton Library) very
much for their kind invitation.

2 See also: Colin Bonwick, Thomas Hollis, in: Oxford Dictionary of National Bio-

graphy, vol. 27, Oxford 2004, 749f.

3 William Henry Bond, Thomas Hollis of Lincoln’s Inn: A Whig and his Books,

Cambridge, MA 2009, 3.

154

Urs B. Leu

works of John Milton. The goals of his plan were »to foster and
extend human liberty, to eliminate governmental corruption, and
to establish religious toleration, even extending, with certain sa-
feguards, to Roman Catholics.«4 Hollis was an acrimonious enemy
of all kind of despotism and tyrannical regimes, not least of the
Roman Catholic Church and especially the Jesuits. He considered
the Catholic Church to be not so much a church as a government
meddling with other governments.5 As a rational dissenter he ad-
vocated religious tolerance and pleaded that religion should not be
mixed with politics. On the other hand he preferred the republican
form of government against democracy, because he considered,
that the »benevolent rule of an intellectual e´lite […] was the surest
means of preserving and fostering his ideals of civil and religious
liberty«.6 Hollis retired in 1770 (only 50 years old) to Urles Farm
in Dorset. There he died suddenly in 1774. He was never married
and had no descendants, so his friend Thomas Brand with surname
Hollis became his heir. He wished to be buried in a field not far
from his house »and that the field should be immediately plowed
over, that no trace of his burial-place might remain.«7

Thomas Hollis was not only one of the great donors of Harvard
College,8 but also a promoter and sponsor of a lot of other insti-
tutions, libraries and persons. Concerning his support of libraries,
I found evidence of donations in Denmark, Germany, Italy, the

4 Bond, Thomas Hollis, 29.
5 Bond, Thomas Hollis, 9f.
6 Bond, Thomas Hollis, 28.
7 Francis Blackburne, Memoirs of Thomas Hollis, vol. 1, London: John Nichols,

1780, 481.

8 William H. Bond, »From the Great Desire of Promoting Learning«: Thomas Hol-
lis’s Gifts to the Harvard College Library, Cambridge, MA / London 2010 (Special Issue
of the Harvard Library Bulletin 19/1–2). Cf. William H. Bond, Letters from Thomas
Hollis of Lincoln’s Inn to Andrew Eliot, in: Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical
Society 99 (1988), 76–167. Concerning book donations to North America there »was
an exotic attractiveness to the idea of planting civilization in the wilderness and the
English intellectuals were so moved by [Jeremiah] Dummer’s appeal that no fewer than
180 of them contributed, including such leading figures as Sir Isaac Newton, Edmund
Halley, Sir Hans Sloane, and Richard Steele. They sent more than 500 volumes, of
which the first shipment, packed in nine boxes, arrived in September 1714.« Edmund S.
Morgan, American Heroes: Profiles of Men and Women who Shaped Early America,
New York/London 2009, 26.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

155

Netherlands,9 Russia, Schottland, Sweden, North America10 and
Switzerland11. Among the Swiss libraries he sponsored the Univer-
sity Library in Basle, the Public Library in Berne, the University
Library in Geneva and the Public Library in Zürich.

1. The Great Plan

Hollis intended to propagate his ideas about liberty not by an
engagement in politics, which he regarded as quite corrupt, nor by
writing books, but by presenting books to libraries.12 Libraries are
places where everybody can go and read or borrow books. Con-
trary to a book on a private bookshelf, a book in a library can be
read by several people and influence their thinking. Hollis hoped
that his liberty-books would be read by a lot of people visiting the
libraries where he donated them and that they would challenge
their opinions and change their minds. The source for this under-
standing of the value of the printed word was perhaps a passage in
the Areopagitica by his intellectual inspiration John Milton. Mil-
ton wrote:

»For books are not absolutely dead things, but do contain a potency of life
in them to be as active as that soul was whose progeny they are; nay, they
do preserve as in a vial the purest efficacy and extraction of that living
intellect that bred them. I know they are as lively and as vigorously pro-
ductive as those fabulous dragon’s teeth; and being sown up and down,
may chance to spring up armed men. And yet, on the other hand, unless
wariness be used, as good almost kill a man as kill a good book: who kills a
man kills a reasonable creature, God’s image; but the who destroys a good

9 Kees van Strien, Thomas Hollis and his Donation to Leiden University Library,

1759–70, in: Quaerendo 30/1 (2000), 3–34.

10 James Holly Hanford, »Ut Spargam«: Thomas Hollis Books in Princeton, in: The

Princeton University Library Chronicle 20/4 (1959), 165–176.

11 Bond, Thomas Hollis, 113; Hans Utz, Die Hollis-Sammlung in Bern: Ein Beitrag
zu den englisch-schweizerischen Beziehungen in der Zeit der Aufklärung, Bern 1959
(Schriften der Literarischen Gesellschaft Bern, Neue Folge der Neujahrsblätter 8), 81.
12 Cf. Mirjam Foot, The History of Bookbinding as a Mirror of Society, London
1998 (The Panizzi Lectures 1997), 95: »A character somewhat resembling Hollis was
his acquaintance Jonas Hanway (1712–1786). He also sought to further the good cau-
ses he espoused by presenting suitable patrons with elaborately bound books on such
subjects.«

156

Urs B. Leu

book kills reason itself, kills the image of God, as it were, in the eye. Many
a man lives a burden to the earth; but a good book is the precious life blood
of a master-spirit, embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a life beyond
life.«13

2. Hollis’ Supralibros

The volumes presented by Hollis are easy to discover in the shelves
of a library. They are bound in leather of different colours and
bear supralibros with typical motifs. Sometimes there are to find
handwritten inscriptions by Hollis in the form of dedications or
marginal notes. William Henry Bond, former librarian of the
Houghton Library in Harvard, described fifteen Hollis-tools for
stamping supralibros on the book cover.14

The first, and most represented shows a seated owl. The owl is
an antique symbol of the goddess Athena and stands for wisdom
and learning. The inverted owl can also be found on Hollis-bin-
dings and announces disapproval and lack of wisdom. The second
tool consists of an owl with wings spread and a palm branch in its
talons. It represents the victory of wisdom in the cause of peace.
The third is a cock and it stands for freedom or enlightenment. The
fourth shows the statue of liberty with a liberty-cap in her hand.
Number five is the liberty-cap alone. Among the Romans, com-
moners and freed slaves sometimes wore the felt pileus, imitated in
the liberty cap. The sixth emblem consists of a harpy clutching a
severed head. On the background of ancient coins and medals this
symbolizes the overthrow of tyranny. The next represents the palm
branch and means victory. The lyre is a symbol for poetry. The
ninth shows an olive branch and means peace. Number ten depicts
an insect (perhaps butterfly) with an arrow and is very rarely used
by Hollis on his bindings. The insect stands for the human soul
and the arrow for tortures, but the meaning of this motif is not
really clear. Number 11 represents the statue of Britannia in dif-
ferent variations. For Hollis England was the only country or one
of the few countries where people could live in liberty. The English

13 John Milton, Das verlorene Paradies, in: John Milton: Werke. Englisch-Deutsch,

Frankfurt a.M. 2008, 872.

14 Bond, Thomas Hollis, 34–77.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

157

understanding of liberty should not only be preserved but also
dispersed among other people, countries and continents. A very
common supralibros is the short sword or dagger and it stands for
the right to take arms against tyranny or the threat of invasion. If
the short sword point is downward it signifies conflict. The cornu-
copia represents abundance, good fortune and happiness. The
wand of Aesculapius signifies not only medicine but symbolizes
learning in the service of mankind. The last of Hollis’ supralibros is
the club of Hercules and means probably power and courage in the
defence of freedom.

3. Why Berne?

Most books Hollis donated to Harvard College. In 1766 for exam-
ple the theologian and later president of Yale College Ezra Stiles
visited Harvard and counted 1200 Hollis-volumes.15 There is only
one other library, where Hollis donated hundreds of volumes: the
Public Library of Berne, the so called »Burgerbibliothek«. Today
there are more than 300 volumes still extant.16 According to the
book of donations in the Burgerbibliothek, an anonymous English
donor gave between 1758 and 1767 over 400 volumes and 7 me-
dals. After his death, his name became known because it was men-
tioned by handing over a legacy of 100 Pounds to the library.17

Why did Hollis choose Berne for such a generous gift? He visited
the city on his Grand Tour. We have no idea how long he stayed
there, but he must have been truly impressed with the order, neat-
ness and prosperity of the town and countryside. The virtuous and
hardworking people were exemplary in Hollis’ eyes. The militia of
freeholders and the military education, the severe and puritan mor-

15 Caroline Robbins, Library of Liberty: Assembled for Harvard College by Thomas

Hollis of Lincoln’s Inn, in: Harvard Library Bulletin 5 (1951), 6.

16 For Berne see mainly: Utz, Hollis-Sammlung; Anne Thirouard Wyss, The Hollis
Collection in Berne: An Account of Some Books in the Collection, Thesis Universite´ de
Paris-Sorbonne, 1981/1982. This chapter draws heavily on this unfortunately unpu-
blished typescript.

17 Munificentiae Monumentum Dicarum Honori Fautorum, Qui Bibliothecam hanc
Publicam Donis locupletarunt, 238r-v (Burgerbibliothek Bern, call number: Mss. h.h.
XII 1); see also: Utz, Hollis-Sammlung, 10–13.

158

Urs B. Leu

als, ordered and enforced by the state and church, the expulsion of
the Catholics and the regular meetings of old and wise aristocrats
and middle class members, were all features that would have given
Hollis a favourable outlook on Berne. Beyond that another factor
in favour of Berne was Hollis’ encounter with Rodolphe de
Vautravers or Valltravers in Genoa in 1753 on his second tour.
Valltravers was a bit of an adventurer, always on the move, an
extravagant, and not quite serious person: »Born in 1723, as a
citizen of Vevey and a Bernese subject, he had married an English
girl, which explained his knowledge of the English language:

»As he himself was a collector of books, manuscripts and medals, and as he
seemed interested in Hollis’ research and was in constant need for money,
he agreed to Hollis’ proposal, which consisted in delivering and dispatching
the book collections that Hollis intended to send to the Continent. He must
have spoken very highly of Berne for very personal reasons: his main aim in
life namely was to enter the Bernese administration […] Thus, as he wished
to attract the attention of the Bernese Excellencies, he might also have
prompted Hollis to send the collection to Berne instead of another Swiss
city. However, he never reached his aim and had to be content with his
activities as a representative of Hollis and a private tutor. Valltravers tra-
velled 18 years, accompanying the rich people’s progeny on tours on the
Continent and through England. Thus, he distributed books that Hollis had
intrusted to him in Sweden and Norway, while he was on a journey with
two Russian students.«18

Furthermore Hollis was a mental friend of the Economical Society
(»Oekonomische Gesellschaft«) of Berne and prompted his corre-
spondents in the colonies of North America to create similar so-
cieties. So he sent in 1760 many books on agriculture and hus-
bandry to Berne for the benefit of this Society. Another reason why
Hollis sent books to Berne might have been the reception which
Berne made to Edmund Ludlow. He belonged to the judges, who
condemned King Charles I to the death penalty. At the restoration
of Charles II in 1660 he took refuge in Switzerland. The asylum so
generously afforded to the English refugees by the Swiss and the
protection that Ludlow enjoyed during the attacks initiateded by
the House of Savoy with the approval of Charles II against the
regicide exiles, was much to Berne’s credit. Ludlow had gone to

18 Thirouard Wyss, Hollis Collection, 22f.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

159

thank personally their Excellencies of Berne for their protection
and dedicated his Memoirs to the Bernese government.19

But in fact the government of Berne was not as liberal, open
minded and modern as Hollis thought. If the members of the coun-
cil had been able to read Hollis’ books published in English, his
gifts would have been censored and disapproved. Rudolph Sinner,
the librarian of the Burgerbibliothek, was able to read English and
as a liberal person he claimed for tolerance and freedom in reli-
gious matters. He understood the situation very well, and directed
the council’s attention on the worth and beauty of the collection
and not on its philosophical and political contents.

A few years later, Hollis recognized the true character of the
Bernese government and became disappointed by the city he had
revered so much. The first blow, which shook Hollis’ trust in the
Bernese liberalism, was caused by Jean Jacques Rousseau’s ex-
pulsion from the canton Berne. The other blow was caused six
months later (1766) by a small book20 written by Beat Herport,
who was a member of the Bernese ruling class. »This treatise was
published anonymously at Biel. It was a humble request to lower
the number of oaths every Swiss had to take, and Herport insisted
on the fact, that in matters of conscience, those oaths should not
be compulsory, thus pleading for religious liberty. As soon as der
grosse Rat had heard about this book, the copies were seized and
burnt under the pretext that they were dangerous for the state and
church. Herport, although aged and sick, was imprisoned and or-
dered to stop writing down such dangerous and subversive
ideas.«21 It was clear, that Hollis’ opinion on Berne from 1766
onwards had radically changed. He published anonymously arti-
cles against the Bernese government in different newspapers in
England. The council protested against these articles and engaged a
private detective to identify the defamer, but without any results.
They did not recognize any link between the anonymous donor
and the author of the letters which had upset them so much, yet

19 Thirouard Wyss, Hollis Collection, 25.
20 Versuch über wichtige Wahrheiten, zur Glückseligkeit der Menschen: bestens
empfohlen allen Regenten der freyen Staaten, zur Erdaurung und nöthigen Besserung,
von einem redlich gesinnten Schweizer, s.l.: s.n., 1766.

21 Thirouard Wyss, Hollis Collection, 29.

160

Urs B. Leu

who were one and the same man. Hollis nevertheless, was serious-
ly disappointed and his conclusion on this subject was that the
Secret Council of Berne is composed of tyrants.22

4. Books for Berne, Basle and Geneva

The first donation of 18 books arrived in Berne on July 20, 1758.
There are three titles, which were very important for Hollis. He
gave them away to quite a lot of libraries. First and most funda-
mental of all were the prose works written by John Milton in two
volumes, published in 1753 in London.23 The second title was the
Life of John Milton written by John Toland and printed in 1761 in
London too.24 Both he presented also to Basle and Geneva. The
third, which he also donated to Basle, was the English Grammar
by John Wallis, published in 1765 in London.25 The latter two
were reprints initiated by Hollis. All in all he was responsible for at
least about 30 titles being reissued which he believed were worth
being reprinted again and again. Most of the books Hollis donated
to North American and European libraries were published in En-
glish, but only a few people in Central Europe were able to un-
derstand this language. So Hollis would help diffuse the command
of English by distributing Wallis’ English grammar. Hollis wrote in
his Diary on June 28, 1760, that he was at the bookseller Mr.
Miller »to engage him to reprint Dr. Wallis Latin Grammar of the
English tongue: for the benefit of Foreigners, and the spreading of
the Principles of truth and Liberty.«26 These »principles of truth
and liberty« can be found in the works of authors like Nathaniel
Bacon, George Buchanan, John Locke, Edmund Ludlow, Henry
Neville, Algernon Sidney and others. He believed »that only in
England and in the English colonies could freedom be enjoyed.«27

22 Thirouard Wyss, Hollis Collection, 30; Utz, Hollis-Sammlung, 124.
23 The work has the following call number in Basle: A.O.I.2 and 2a; Berne: Hollis

69; Geneva: BGE Hgc 622*.

24 The work has the following call number in Basle: A.O.I.2b; Berne: Hollis 101;

Geneva: BGE Hgc 636.

25 The work has the following call number in Basle: A.O.III.63; Berne: Hollis 280.
26 Hollis Diary is preserved in the Houghton Library, Harvard University.
27 Robbins, Library of Liberty, 11.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

161

In the copy of Milton’s prose works which Hollis donated four
years later in 1762 to the University Library in Basle, he wrote on
the last flyleaf a list of so called »Liberty Books« in the following
sequence:28

1.* George Buchanan: De iure regni apud Scotos, Edinburgh 1579.
2.

Stephanus Iunius Brutus [i.e. Hubert Languet]29: Vindiciae contra Ty-
rannos …, Edinburgh [i.e. Basle] 1579.

3. William Prynne: The soveraigne Power of Parliaments and Kingdoms;

4.

in 4 parts with an appendix, London 1643.
John Sadler: Rights of the Kingdom; or Customs of our Ancestors,
London 1649.

5. Henry Neville: Plato Redivivus [without mentioning printing place

6.

and year].
Titus Oates: Picture of the late King James,30 in four parts [without
mentioning printing place and year].
Samuel Johnson: Works, edit. 2, London 1693.

7.
8.* Edmund Ludlow: Memoirs [without mentioning printing place and

year].

9.* [Nathaniel] Bacon: On government31 [without mentioning printing

place and year].

10.* Algernon Sidney: On government32 [without mentioning printing pla-

ce and year].

11.* John Locke: On government33 [without mentioning printing place and

year].

12.* [Robert] Molesworth: Account of Denmark,34 and other pieces.
13.

[John] Trenchard, History of standing armies in England; and other
pieces.

14. The State tracts of C. II. and W. III; in three vol. in folio.35

28 See also the list of »Canonical Books« composed by Robbins, Library of Liberty,

193–196.

29 Sometimes this pseudonym is also attributed to Philippe de Mornay (1549–1623).

Hollis adds wrongly »sive ut putatur Theodoro Beza«.

30 Id est: Eikon basilike¯, or, The picture of the late King James drawn to the life.
31 Not clear, which work: An historical discourse of the uniformity of the govern-
ment of England, or The continuation of an historical discourse of the government of
England or XVI propositions concerning the reign and government of a king.

32 Id est: Discourses concerning government.
33 Id est: Two treatises of government.
34 Id est: An account of Denmark as it was in the year 1692.
35 Id est: A collection of State tracts: published on occasion of the late revolution
1688 and during the reign of King William III., London 1705–1707. There is a copy in
the Hollis-collection in Berne, call number: Hollis 37: 1–3.

162

Urs B. Leu

Six of them, marked with an asterisk, were part of the first gift to
Berne. The second and much larger present to Berne from 1765
(before the disillusioning events of 1766) contained 397 volumes.
About one third of all the titles were works on politics, one third
on religion and one third on other topics,36 among them for exam-
ple scientific publications written by Isaac Newton, books on Bri-
tish fossils by John Woodward or on biblical chronology by James
Ussher. Hollis not only wanted to promulgate the political and
religious »truth and liberty« of England, but also wanted to
acquaint the Swiss people with the culture, history and scientific
achievements of his beloved fatherland. He explained »history in
terms of a struggle between tyranny and liberty. English develop-
ment is all important, because only in England, with all her faults
and backslidings, can any real freedom be found. Nothing English
is without interest […]«.37

Books donated by Hollis can easily be identified by their bin-
dings as we have seen above. Bound in one of the Bernese volumes
is a little piece of paper on which Hollis gave instructions for the
binder. He wrote: »To be bound in rough calf. The Title as on the
other side. No gilding. The leaves to be cut but not colored.«38 On
the title page there’s a handwritten note by Hollis, which can also
be found quite often in the books he gave away: »Ut spargam«.
These two Latin words mean, that the title should be diffused as
part of his »great plan«.

Another criterion for identifying volumes donated by Hollis is
the anonymous handwritten dedication with the following words
as for example written on the flyleaf of John Locke’s Letters con-
cerning toleration:39 »An Englishman, a Lover of Liberty, civil &
religious, Citizen of the World, is desirous of having the honour to
present this book to the public Library at Berne in Switzerland.
London, Jan. 1, 1765.« Or a dedication written on the same day to
Basle is quite similar: »An Englishman, Citizen of the World, is
desirous of having the honor to present this Book to the public
Library of the University of Basle. London, Jan. 1, 1765.«40 Ano-

36 Utz, Hollis-Sammlung, 24.
37 Robbins, Library of Liberty, 15.
38 Berne, call number: Hollis 292.
39 Berne, call number: Hollis 71.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

163

ther example of a volume, dedicated in 1769 to Zurich, has the
following inscription: »An Englishman, an Assertor of Liberty, ci-
vil & religious, at all times, is desirous of having the honor to
present this Book, to the Public Library at Zurich, in Switzerland.
London, June 12, 1769.«41

A last thing, which is very typical for Hollis-books is the fact
that he sometimes wrote marginal commentaries and underlined or
marked passages, which were important in his eyes. It is interesting
to see, that he donated often the same books to different libraries,
but he did not write the same notes or did not punctuate the same
passages. It seems to be, that he prepared the books especially for
each library. So he wrote several times about his preparatory
works in his diary. On September 15, 1761 he noted: »Buisy [sic!]
the afternoon & evening about the Sett of Milton’s prose works [in
two volumes] intended for the public library of the University of
Groningen.« And at September 20: »Finished the Milton’s inten-
ded for the University Library of Groningen.«

On January 2, 1762, he spent time on annotating another work:
»Within the whole day preparing notes which are to be inserted in
a work intitled Clementis XI Pont. max. epistolae […] Romae,
MDCCXXIV, […], 2 v[olumes] in folio; which work I […] intend,
in the course of some months to present to the British Museum, for
service of the public & posterity.« And a last example from March
29, 1762: »Buisy all the morning preparing notes for A[lgernon]
Sydney’s works.«

The notes Hollis made contain additional information concer-
ning the author and the work, would guide the reader to important
passages and help him to draw the »right« conclusions. So he gave
for example on the back of the titlepage of the anonymous pub-
lished tract The Occasional Writer: Being an Answer to the Second
Manifesto of the Pretender’s Eldest Son […]« (London 1746) in-
formations about the author’s name: »This is a very fine Liberty
tract, & was written by The Right honorable William Grant of

40 John Wallis, Grammatica […], London: Guil. Bowyer, prostant apud A. Millar,

1765. Basle, call number: A.O.III.63.

41 Zurich, call number: Ch 396. This anonymously written volume has no typical
Hollis-binding. The title is: Authentic Memoirs Concerning the Portuguese Inquisition,
Never before Published […], London: John Murray, 1769.

164

Urs B. Leu

Preston Grange, now Lord Advocate of Scotland. (1757)«.42 An-
other title of the Public Library in Berne is the History of Standing
Armies in England written by John Trenchard. Hollis noted at the
margin on page 12 about the detested Kings of the Stuarts: »Ob-
serve how masterly the four most infamous Characters of J[ames]
I., C[harles] I., C[harles] II. & J[ames] II. are drawn.«43 On the last
page he gave advices for further reading: »There are two other fine
Liberty tracts on this Subject written about the same time with this
pamphlet; one of them by Fletcher of Saltoun,44 the other by Mr.
Moyle.«

On the flyleaf of John Locke’s Two Treatises of Government
(London 1690),45 which belongs according to Hollis to the most
important books ever published, he wrote on the flyleaf of the
copy in Berne: »This most excellent Book, was written in defence
of the ever memorable and glorious Revolution, and in support of
the common rights of mankind; and this edition, and that of 1698,
are the best editions of this Work. For they were published during
the life of the Author, and the later editions have been rendered
obscure and abused by new printing.« He punctuated in the pre-
face the following sentence (underlining identical with the origi-
nal): »And to justifie to the World, the People of England, whose
love of their just and natural Rights with their Resolution to pre-
serve them, saved the Nation, when it was on the very brink of
Slavery and Ruine.« Hollis emphasized once more the love of the
English to political freedom and the fact, that other nations can
learn from them. There would be many more interesting examples
of commentaries and references to other works which are worth
studying more in detail.

The fact that Hollis did not always make the same inscriptions is
obvious for example on the basis of a comparison of the copies of
the edition of Milton’s prose works in two volumes (London 1753)
that are today preserved in Berne and in Basle. The copy in the
Public Library in Berne was donated on July 20, 1758, the copy in

42 Berne, call number: Hollis 186, Nr. 3.
43 Berne, call number: Hollis 186, Nr. 4.
44 Andrew Feltcher of Saltoun (1692–1766) was a notable Scottish judge and Lord

Justice Clerk.

45 Berne, call number: Hollis 261.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

165

Basle on April 14, 1761. Between the two donations nearly three
years had elapsed. The copy of the Public Library in Geneva dates
also from April 14, 1761. The first remarkable difference is the
binding. The copy in Berne is bound in brown leather and shows
Britannia with a palm branch goffered on the front and back cover
and on the spine together with a lion. The copies in Basle and
Geneva are bound in red maroquin leather and have also Britannia
on the front cover of the first volume, but not only with a palm
branch in the right hand, but also with a stick with the liberty cap
at the top. The backcover of the first volume shows the statue of
liberty with two clubs of Hercules. The front cover of volume two
has two swords and a liberty cap in the middle, the back cover a
harpy clutching a head flanked of two lyres. The Basle copy has an
owl on the spine, the Genevan an owl and a cock.46

Concerning the handwritten notes, the volumes in Berne and
Basle differ as well. Worth mentioning is not only the list of »Li-
berty Books« presented above, but also an entry in the introduc-
tion of the first volume where a painting showing the young Mil-
ton is described. The picture was in the collection of Charles
Stanhope. Hollis noted in the Basle copy at the bottom: »Now in
the possession of Thomas Hollis of Lincoln’s Inn.«47 This picture
of Milton is the same painting, which Hollis mentions in his diary
on June 3, 1760: »Purchased an original portrait of John Milton,
when a youth of ten years at age […] by public auction […] for one
and thirty Guineas.«

According to the handwritten dedications by Hollis he donated
the prose works of Milton and the Life of John Milton written by
John Toland on April 14, 1761, to the libraries in Basle48 and
Geneva. It was his 41st birthday. He wrote nothing about these
gifts in his diary but only some selfcritical thoughts. During the
next years he made further donations to both cities. On July 27,

46 I thank Thierry Dubois (Bibliothe`que de Gene`ve) for his descriptions of the Ge-

nevan bindings.

47 John Milton, The Works of John Milton – Historical, Political, and Miscella-
neous, vol. 1, London: Printed for A. Millar, in the Strand, 1753, p. iii (call number
University Library Basle: A.O.I.2).

48 Isaak Iselin from Basle wrote on September 2, 1762, to Salomon Hirzel in Zürich,
that the anonymous donator and friend of freedom should be invited to Switzerland, see
Utz, Hollis-Sammlung, 81.

166

Urs B. Leu

1762, he sent a collection of twelve etchings with portraits of John
Milton, Edmund Ludlow, Algernon Sidney, Andrew Marvell, Isaac
Newton and some medals to Geneva.49 The fourth and last volume
he donated to the University Library in Basle is the English Gram-
mar by John Wallis. Hollis’ dedication dates from January 1,
1765.50 Another inscription on a flyleaf of the same volume proves
that the volume did not arrive in Basle before October 1766: »Bi-
bliothecae publicae Basiliensis, Dono Viri illustris, Anonymi Angli.
1766. Mense Octobri allatum per D. de Valtraverse.« Valltravers
was once more the intermediary for this Hollis-book’s journey to
Switzerland.

5. Hollis’ Network

If we have a look at Hollis’ diary and read his entries from Decem-
ber 1764 to February 1765 we not only find out that Hollis was
responsible for the new edition of Wallis’ grammar, but we dis-
cover a wide branching network, built up by Hollis for the distri-
bution of his books. According to his diary he invested a lot of
time between December 28, 1764, until February 6, 1765 in pre-
paring the new editions of Locke’s Letter concerning toleration
and Wallis’ Grammar for sending abroad. On January 9 he sent
»away several Boxes of Locke’s & Wallis’s yesterday and today to
Ned Burton to be shipped to Italy.« On January 11 he again was
»preparing some of Wallis’s Grammars and other odd matters,
which are to sent to that Consul [Tatem] to be distributed under
his obliging direction in the Island of Sicily.« Next day: »Busied
the whole day in preparing Locke on Toleration, some Wallis’s
Grammars, & other odd matters, which are to be sent to Mr.
Francis Jermy of Leghorn,51 to be distributed by him, obligingly, in
Italy.« On January 18, 1765, we find the note: »Finished and

49 The same collection is also preserved in the Burgerbibliothek Berne.
50 The volume is mentioned in: Ueli Dill, Schenkungen verzeichnen, in: Treffenliche
schöne Biecher: Hans Ungnads Büchergeschenk und die Universitätsbibliothek Basel im
16. Jahrhundert, ed. Lorenz Heiligensetzer et al., Basel 2005, 126. The book is still
extant in the University Library Basle (call number: A.O.III.63).

51 Francis Jermy Leghorn (1705–1781), until 1751 merchant in Livorno, then in

Leghorn.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

167

packed a number of Locke’s and Wallis’s, which are be sent to Mr.
Valltravers of Rockhall near Bienne in Switzerland; one of each for
himself, the rest to be distributed by him, obligingly, in Switzer-
land & that Neighbourhood.« Four boxes with books by Locke
and Wallis were addressed to Mister John George Bausch, Mer-
chant in Hamburg, to be distributed among Mister Wroughton in
Warsaw (Poland), Mister Valltravers near Berne (Switzerland),
Mister Charles Reynold Berch in Stockholm (Sweden) and one box
was to be sent to the University in Copenhagen (Denmark). Fur-
ther copies of Locke and Wallis were intended for the Academy of
Arts and Sciences at Saint Petersburg and to the University of Mos-
cow.52 On January 27 he prepared another box with books and
tracts for Dr. Dumaresque53 at Saint Petersburg. On January 29 he
noted that he was busy all evening with preparing »another parcel
of books, that is intended to be sent to Mister John George Bausch
in Hamburg, anonymously like the former parcel, and finished
forthwith but not forwarded till the departure of the next ship, in 4
or 5 weeks. It will contain a Locke & Wallis for himself, & nine-
teen other copies of Wallis’s Grammar, which are to be dispatched
by him obligingly, into different parts of Germany.« The entry on
January 29 sheds some light on the channels of distribution in
Eastern Europe. The Wallis-volumes have to be forwarded to Tho-
mas Wroughton Esq. British Minister at Warsaw, »to be distribu-
ted, obligingly, one of each to the King of Poland, one of each for
himself, and the rest, Wallis’s books, to various learned Bodies in
Poland and Transilvania.« On January 23 he noted that some co-
pies of Wallis’ Grammar had been meant to be sent to Denmark
and Sweden. According to a note on February 4, some Wallis-
books should be shiped to Mister Bartholomew Ulloa, bookseller
at Madrid, a correspondent of Mister Baker, to be dispersed in that
city and in Spain. On February 6 he prepared further Wallis-books
for Spain: »Busied till late at Night in preparing 4 Copies of
Wallis, which are to be sent anonymously, to The Rev. Edward
Clarke, author of the Letter concerning the Spanish Nation now

52 Hollis, Diary, January 26, 1765.
53 Dr. Daniel Dumaresque (1712–1805), Fellow of the Royal Society and educati-
onal consultant to Russian and Polish monarchs among them Catherine the Great
(1762–1796).

168

Urs B. Leu

Chaplain to the Garrison at Minorca.« So Hollis’ distribution grid
included diplomats, merchants, booksellers and theologians. This
interesting network would be well worth for further research. The-
re is much additional information to be found on it in Hollis’ diary
and in his Memoirs.

6. The Hollis-Collection in Zurich

Absolutely different and unique compared to all the mentioned
gifts is the Hollis-collection in Zurich. Hollis sent neither Milton’s
prose works, nor Toland’s biography on Milton nor Wallis’ Gram-
mar to Zürich. The reason may be, because Milton was already
well known in Zurich and highly esteemed and there were an un-
known number of people who were able to understand English.
The famous Swiss writer and representative of the Enlightment in
Zürich Johann Jakob Bodmer not only possessed works by Mil-
ton,54 but translated his Paradise lost into German and published it
six times in Zurich in 1732, 1742, 1754, 1759, 1769 and 1780.55
Sending Milton’s works to Zürich would have been like carrying
owls to Athens.

The 115 titles in all which Hollis sent between 1762 and 1769 to
Zürich are an interesting collection of anti-Jesuit works.56 Some of
the titles are quite seldom as already Johann Caspar von Orelli –
commonly called the founder of the University of Zurich – noted
on the inside cover of one of these books.57 As already mentioned
Hollis did not like the Jesuits because they seemed to him to be the
incarnation of religious intolerance and coercion. The whole col-
lection is bound in brown leather and all except one have Supra-
libros as described above. The most common motif is the sitting

54 Bodmer possessed for example an edition of the important Defensio secunda pro
populo Anglicano. The volume is part of Bodmer’s library, which is preserved in the
Zentralbibliothek Zurich (call number: 25.21). The title was already read in Zurich at
the end of the 17th century as a copy of the book proves, which belonged since 1691 to
Johann Heinrich Waser (call number: 10.4461).

55 Simon Grynaeus in Basle translated Miltons Paradise regained, Samson and some

poems into German. The book was published in 1752.

56 They are all part of the shelf mark »Ch«.
57 Call number: Ch 411.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

169

owl (81), followed by the sword (19) and combinations of other
emblems like the sitting owl, flying owl, cock, palm branch and the
harpy clutching a head. In 1769 he presented one last volume58
with a few little stars on the binding. Furthermore he donated at
the same time 20 Guineas for the acquisition of more anti-Jesuit
works. These books are not totally bound in leather, but have only
cheaper halfleather bindings. The Supralibros of the owl and the
sword are imitations of the English tools; both are a little bit
broader than the originals.

Most of the works (82) are published anonymously, because it
could be dangerous to write against the Jesuits and to present the
author’s name on the titlepage. Contrary to the other donations,
the Hollis-books in Zürich are not only published in English, but
also in other languages: 53 titles are in French, 40 in Italian, 15 in
English, 5 in German and 2 in Latin. The imprints were published
in different parts of Europe: Amsterdam, Barcelona, Cologne, Lis-
bon, London, Naples, Paris, Venice and other cities. One of the
most mentioned places of printing is Lugano as the catholic capital
city of the Italian speaking part of Switzerland. These titles were all
produced between 1759 and 1762. Recent research has shown that
the printing place Lugano of these anti-Jesuit tracts was a false
address, the real place of publication was Venice.59 Venice had for
centuries maintained its autonomy from the Pope and had quite a
liberal attitude toward censorship, but even the printers there
choose the fictitious printing place »Lugano«.60 25 books of the
Hollis-Collection in Zurich were published in Venice, though 18 of
them list Lugano on the title page, 19 appeared in the liberal city of
Amsterdam, 15 in London, 8 in Lisbon and the rest in other cities.
Concerning the themes which are discussed in these books and
tracts, there are some recognizable focal points. One is the aboli-
tion of the Jesuits in France and Portugal. In Portugal the Jesuits

58 Call number: Ch 396.
59 P. Callisto Caldelari, L’arte della stampa da Milano a Lugano: La tipografia Ag-
nelli specchio di un’epoca, Lugano 2008, 60–64. Especially anti-Jesuit tracts were prin-
ted with the false address »Lugano«: Patrizia Bravetti, Orfea Granzotto, False date:
Repertorio delle licenze di stampa veneziane con falso luogo di edizione (1740–1797),
Firenze 2008 (Fonti storiche e letterarie: Edizioni cartacee e digitali 21), 18–22.

60 Ekkehard Eickhoff, Venedig – Spätes Feuerwerk: Glanz und Untergang der Re-

publik (1700–1797), Stuttgart 2006, 225f.

170

Urs B. Leu

were forbidden and expelled in October 1759 in the context of
Enlightened absolutism and in France the activity of the Jesuits
ended in November 1764. Furthermore the Hollis donation in-
cluded titles about Jansenism and the bull called Unigenitus from
1713, wherein the Pope wrote against the Jansenists. Also the pa-
pal bull In coena domini is quite often discussed. This bull was
written by Pope Gregory IX in 1229 and was read every year on
Holy Thursday in the Catholic Churches. Among other things it
disapproved all kind of heretics and people working against the
church. During the 18th century several enlightened heads of state
stopped the reading of that bull.

Hollis was well informed about the problems with the Jesuits in
Europe.61 He composed his collection with the help of Mister
Elmsly,62 a French bookseller, and Reverend Dr. Caleb Fleming, a
Protestant Dissenter and many years the Pastor of an Independent
Congregation in Bartholomew Close and at Pinners Hall.63 Origi-
nally Hollis intended to present this collection to the British Mu-
seum, but, as he wrote in his Memoirs: »[…] the behaviour of a
committee of the trustees was so strange towards me, on a parti-
cular occasion, that I could not resolve any longer, with any degree
of magnanimity, to send it to that place.«64 What was this obscure
»occasion«? There were two conflicts between Hollis and the Bri-
tish Museum in 1761. The first took place in January 1761, be-
cause of the refusal of a certain New Years gift. Hollis presented a
rare satyrical Italian print against the Jesuits in a handsome frame
of glass to the Museum,65 but the Committee refused to hang it up,
»because they were apprehensive of offence being taken, if it be

61 He wrote in his diary on November 2, 1760: »Read in the afternoon certain

French papers relating to the affairs of the Jesuits in Portugal.«

62 Blackburne, Memoirs of Thomas Hollis, 169: »Some time before this period Mr.
Hollis had employed Mr. Elmsly the French bookseller, to collect every thing he could
meet with written against the Jesuits; which commission Mr. Elmsly executed with great
success. The collection was a noble one, and was sent this year to the public library of
Zurich.«

63 Hollis wrote in his diary on April 28, 1761: »Found a curious labored letter from
The Rev. Mr. Caleb Fleming, in answer to one of mine, requesting him to furnish me
with a List of Writers against the Jesuits.«

64 Blackburne, Memoirs of Thomas Hollis, 169.
65 Hollis, Diary, January 6, 1761.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

171

hung up.«66 They made the proposal to take it out of the frame and
insert it in the collection of the Museum, but Hollis let them know:
»The Trustees may hang up the print or return it as they please, but
it shall not be taken out of its frame.«67

The second disappointment cropped up when Hollis presented a
new edition procured by him of Toland’s Life of Milton. The gift
was thrown out by the curators, because it was a duplicate, »and
the first edition [was] kept in preference to it. This must have had
the appearance of an intended affront to the donor, who always
accompanied his presents with some intimation in writing from
whom they came. This slight, it is conjectured, deprived the Mu-
seum of this curious collection of tracts against the Jesuits.«68

On June 8, 1762, Hollis wrote in his diary: »Dispatched away,
gladly, the set of Books relating to the Jesuits, & of the three sets
of Milton’s. Mr. Valltravers with me, from eleven till three. Much
conversation with him concerning the best method of forwarding
those books […]«. Four days later he was the greatest part of the
day busy in writing a catalogue of the books »relating to the Je-
suits & to Popery, just now sent abroad as a present to the Public
Library of the Canton of Zurich.«69 On July 30 Valltravers met
with Hollis for the last time before returning to Switzerland.70 The
Committee for the Public Library in Zurich registered at the
meeting of December 18 of the same year the donation of 84
books, all relating to the politics and moral of the Jesuits, by an
unknown English gentleman who signed with the name »Marvil-
le«.71 The poet and politician Andrew Marvell, who was in good
relationship with Cromwell and Milton, belonged to Hollis’ fa-
vourite authors. Two years before he had purchased an oil painting
showing his portrait.72 On May 1763 Hollis sent another 15 vo-
lumes to Zurich.73 He received the books from the consul Smith in

66 Hollis, Diary, January 11, 1761.
67 Hollis, Diary, January 11, 1761.
68 Blackburne, Memoirs of Thomas Hollis, 170.
69 The catalogue is lost.
70 Hollis, Diary, July 30, 1761.
71 Actorum bibliothecae civicae Turicensium, Tomus VIII, Archive of the Zentral-

bibliothek Zurich, call number: Arch St. 8, 26.

72 Hollis, Diary, July 9, 1760.
73 Utz, Hollis-Sammlung, 51; Hollis, Diary, June 29, 1763: »Buisy the whole morn-

Urs B. Leu

172
Venice: »[…] fifteen volumes of tracts in duodecimo, uniformly
bound, relating to the Jesuits; being intended by Mr. Hollis for a
supplement to the present he made the year before to Zurich.«74
This present was also delivered by Valltravers. Johann Gerhard
Andreae, Apothecary to the Court of Hanover, met him in Zurich
and wrote about him on September 7, 1763: »This morning early I
left Zurich in company with an English ship’s captain and Mr de
Valltravers who lives in Bienne, a very pleasant gentleman, widely
travelled, whose familiarity with many lands has earned for him
great skill in science and natural history.«75

On January 30, 1769, Hollis received via Valltravers a letter
written by the librarian Caspar Hess from Zurich. Hess asked par-
don for the delay in expressing the library’s gratitude for Hollis’
donations and explained the reason why they had been forgotten.
At the same time he wrote that friends of the Jesuits sent books for
their defense.

On the occasion of their meeting on June 10, 1769, the Com-
mittee of the Zurich Library heard about a letter Valltravers wrote
to Doctor Ziegler in Winterthur, announcing 20 Guineas from
»Marvell« for buying more books against the Jesuits.76 It was de-
cided to comply with the donor’s wish.77 The volumes were bound
in halfleather bindings with imitations of the original supralibros
as described above.

According to his last will, Hollis gave to Berne78 and Geneva79 in
1774 100 Pounds Sterling each. Then by the opening of the tes-
tament it became apparent, who the English donor was.

ing in preparing a small parcel of books which are to go to the public library of Zurich,
as a supplement to those sent there last year.«

74 Blackburne, Memoirs of Thomas Hollis, 189.
75 G. R. de Beer, Rodolph Valltravers, F.R.S., in: Notes and Records of the Royal

Society of London 4/2 (1946), 220.

76 See also Hollis, Diary, June 7, 1769.
77 Actorum bibliothecae civicae Turicensium, Tomus VIII, Meeting of June 10, 1769,

Archive of the Zentralbibliothek Zurich, call number: Arch St. 8, 32.

78 Utz, Hollis-Sammlung, 136.
79 Thiery Dubois, »Comme des tuteurs a`

l’e´gard de leur pupille [...]«: Les fonds
d’imprime´s anciens, in: Patrimoine de la Bibliothe`que de Gene`ve: Un e´tat des lieux au
de´but du XXIe sie`cle, ed. Danielle Buyssens et al., Geneva 2006, 43. In the Genevan
records the name of the donor is curiously mentioned as »Denzel Hollis«.

The Hollis-Collections in Switzerland

173

In Zurich nobody had any idea, who had made the donations
and why. After Hollis’ death it became clear for some people, who
read scholarly journals, that the donator’s name was Hollis. But it
was still not evident, why he gave the books to Zurich. Decades
later the librarian Johann Jakob Horner bought Hollis’ Memoirs,
held a talk in 184880 and recapitulated what he had read in the two
volumes81 and why the collection came to Zurich. So there elapsed
nearly 80 years between Hollis’ last donation in 1769 and the time
when his identity was disclosed for a wider public.

Urs B. Leu, Dr. phil., Zentralbibliothek Zurich

Abstract: Thomas Hollis (1720–1774) was not only one of the most important donors
of the Harvard College Library, but donated also books to a number of institutions
throughout Europe, among them the main libraries in Basle, Berne, Geneva and Zurich.
This article shows the motivations behind Hollis’s choice of books and recipients to
spread the philosophy of political and religious liberty and demonstrates for the first
time the full extent of Hollis’s campaign to influence protestant scholars in Switzerland.

Keywords: Enlightenment, History of Libraries, History of Books, England, Protestan-
tism, Switzerland, Thomas Hollis, Tolerance, 18th Century

80 Zentralbibliothek Zurich, Ms M 12.36, 1.
81 The books are still preserved in the Zentralbibliothek Zurich, call numbers: GG

35 & 36.

