ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 38 (2011), 67–152

Josias Simler and the Fathers

The »Scripta veterum latina« (1571)

Mark Taplin

On 3 September 1571, the rector of the Chur Latin school, Johan-
nes Pontisella, wrote to congratulate Josias Simler on the publi-
cation of his Scripta veterum latina, a collection of patristic texts
generated by the Nestorian and Eutychian controversies.1 Ponti-
sella places Simler in a chain of anti-heretical writers raised up to
defend »the pure and uncorrupted doctrine of the Son of God«
against Satan’s attempts to subvert it. The tradition was initiated,
he claims, by the apostle John, whose gospel provided the church

1 Josias Simler, Scripta veterum latina, de una persona et duabus naturis Domini et
Servatoris nostri Iesu Christi, adversus Nestorium, Eutychen et Acephalos olim aedita
[…], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Younger, 1571 (Manfred Vischer, Bibliographie
der Zürcher Druckschriften des 15. und 16. Jahrhunderts, Baden-Baden 1991 [BZD],
no C 838f.). Simler was born on 6 November 1530. After studying at Basel and Stras-
bourg, he was appointed professor of New Testament at the Zurich academy (1551); he
also served as pastor in Zollikon (1551–1557) and deacon at the city church of St Peter
(1557–1560). In 1563 he succeeded Peter Martyr Vermigli as Zurich professor of Old
Testament. He died on 2 July 1576. For an overview of Simler’s career, see Hans Ulrich
Bächtold, Simler, Josias, in: Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon, vol. 15,
Herzberg 1999, 1298–1303 (with accompanying bibliography); Hans Ulrich Bächtold,
Josias Simler: Vielseitiger Humanist, Theologe und Historiker, in: Schola Tigurina: Die
Zürcher Hohe Schule und ihre Gelehrten um 1550. Katalog zur Ausstellung vom 25.
Mai bis 10. Juli 1999 in der Zentralbibliothek Zürich, Zurich 1999, 32f.; Georg von
Wyss, Josias Simler: Professor der Theologie in Zürich, 1530–1576, Zurich 1855 (Neu-
jahrsblatt zum Besten des Waisenhauses in Zürich 18), 1–24. The contemporary bio-
graphy by Johann Wilhelm Stucki, Vita clarissimi viri d. Iosiae Simleri Tigurini, Zurich:
Christoph Froschauer the Younger, 1577 (BZD C 925) is still useful.

68

Mark Taplin

with a »most reliable shield« against the errors of »Ebion« and
Cerinthus. In subsequent generations, it was continued first by
John’s disciples Ignatius and Polycarp, then by their student Ire-
naeus, and finally by the theologians whose works are assembled
in the Scripta veterum. By publishing these texts in a single volume,
Simler has forged a powerful weapon to »stop up the mouth« of
blasphemers – a true »hammer of heretics«.2

Like most of Simler’s works, the Scripta veterum has received
scant attention from historians, yet it tells us a great deal about the
nature and purpose of patristic scholarship in Zurich (and other
Reformed centres of learning) during this period. The volume is
ambitious in scope, bringing together Latin texts by nine fifth and
sixth-century authors, some familiar, others relatively obscure. All
but one of the works is accompanied by Annotationes, consisting
of a bio-bibliographical introduction and textual commentary. In
addition, the Scripta veterum incorporates a detailed history of
early church Christological disputes, entitled Narratio veterum et
recentium controversiarum de una persona et duabus naturis Iesu
Christi Servatoris nostri. This section of the volume is of particular
interest, as it demonstrates the interconnectedness of historiogra-
phy and theological polemic in the late sixteenth century. For Sim-
ler and his contemporaries, the history of the early church was not
just a record of distant events, but an essential point of reference in
the controversies of their own day.

1. The polemical background

1.1 The Zurich reformers’ use of church history

The study of ecclesiastical history and the Fathers was an impor-
tant aspect of the intellectual culture of Reformed Zurich. Twenty-
one patristic works, among them texts by Augustine, Jerome, Lac-
tantius, Tertullian and even Proclus of Constantinople, have been
identified in Heinrich Bullinger’s library.3 His magnum opus, the

2 See Appendix.
3 Urs B. Leu and Sandra Weidmann, Heinrich Bullingers Privatbibliothek, Zurich
2004 (Heinrich Bullinger Werke 1/3), 43. On Bullinger’s reception of the Fathers, see

Josias Simler and the Fathers

69

Decades (1549–1551), includes more than 500 citations from the
Fathers,4 while the two-volume manuscript compilation of com-
monplaces on which he drew throughout his career is richly sto-
cked with patristic sources.5 Although the Zurich reformers are
better known for their chorographies and works of secular history
– not least Simler’s own De republica Helvetiorum, which went
through around 25 editions in the sixteenth, seventeenth and eigh-
teenth centuries – there was a lively tradition of ecclesiastical his-
toriography in the city. Bullinger himself owned copies of the 1549
and 1554 Basel editions of Eusebius and his continuators, to which
he alludes frequently in his works.6

Like other sixteenth-century Protestants, Bullinger saw in church
history a means of legitimising the Reformation, by challenging
Rome’s claim to exclusive ownership of the Christian past, and
discrediting theological opponents. In the early works Verglei-
chung der uralten und unserer Zeiten Ketzereien (1526) and De
origine erroris (1539), he charts the emergence of key Catholic
doctrines so as to demonstrate their unscriptural character.7 The
same combination of church history and polemic is to be found in
his Assertio orthodoxa (1534), a defence of orthodox Christology

Silke-Petra Bergjan, Bullinger und die griechischen Kirchenväter in der konfessionellen
Auseinandersetzung, in Heinrich Bullinger und seine Zeit: Eine Vorlesungsreihe, ed.
Emidio Campi, Zurich 2004 (Zwingliana 31), 133–160; Alfred Schindler, Bullinger und
die lateinischen Kirchenväter, in: ibid., 161–177; and David Wright, Heinrich Bullinger
and the Early Church Fathers, in: Emidio Campi, Peter Opitz (eds), Heinrich Bullinger:
Life – Thought – Influence, 2 vols, Zurich 2007 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformations-
geschichte 24), vol. 1, 357–378.

4 Leu/Weidmann, Heinrich Bullingers Privatbibliothek, 50.
5 Urs B. Leu, Die Loci-Methode als enzyklopädisches Ordnungssystem, in: Allge-
meinwissen und Gesellschaft: Akten des internationalen Kongresses über Wissenstrans-
fer und enzyklopädische Ordnungssysteme von 18. bis 21. September in Prangins, ed.
Paul Michel and Madeleine Herren, Aachen 2007, 340–342.

6 Leu/Weidmann, Heinrich Bullingers Privatbibliothek, 49f.; Bergjan, Bullinger,
143. For details of these editions, see Martin Wallraff, Die Rezeption der spätantiken
Kirchengeschichtswerke im 16. Jahrhundert, in: Auctoritas Patrum II: Neue Beiträge zur
Rezeption der Kirchenväter im 15. und 16. Jahrhundert, ed. Leif Grane et al., Mainz
1998, 223–260.

7 Christian Moser, Heinrich Bullinger’s Efforts to Document the Zurich Reforma-
tion: History as Legacy, in: Bruce Gordon and Emidio Campi (eds), Architect of Re-
formation: An Introduction to Heinrich Bullinger, 1504–1575, Grand Rapids 2004
(Texts and Studies in Reformation and Post-Reformation Thought), 201f.

70

Mark Taplin

against the antitrinitarian Claude d’Aliod,8 and in the Decades,
which opens with a brief discourse on the councils of Nicaea, Con-
stantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon.9 The latter theme is develo-
ped in book I of De conciliis, where Bullinger rehearses the history
of the six ecumenical councils recognised by the Reformed.10 In
emphasising the Zurich church’s acceptance of the trinitarian and
Christological formulas hammered out at these councils, Bullinger
was responding to persistent Lutheran and Catholic attempts to
link the Reformed to more radical dissenting groups. De summa
trinitate et fide catholica (1555), by Bullinger’s colleague Theodor
Bibliander, provides a further example of the Zurichers’ apologetic
use of church history. Through a detailed analysis of the anti-
heresy legislation in the Justinianic Code, Bibliander seeks to de-
monstrate the »catholicity« of Reformed Christians and their con-
sequent exemption from the Roman law penalties for heresy.11

The Zurich reformers did not see their reliance on the Fathers
and other early church sources as at all inconsistent with the scrip-
ture principle. In De conciliis, Bullinger distinguishes clearly bet-
ween the inherent authority of the Bible and the decrees of church
councils, which are to be rejected »unless the things that they say
are to be believed or done or avoided can be supported from scrip-
ture«.12 However, the scripture principle as understood by Bullin-

8 See Mark Taplin, Bullinger on the Trinity: »Religionis nostrae caput et funda-

mentum«, in: Gordon/Campi, Architect of Reformation, 78–81.

9 Heinrich Bullinger Schriften, ed. Emidio Campi et al., 7 vols, Zurich 2004–2007

[HBS], vol. 3, 37–56.

10 Heinrich Bullinger, De conciliis. Quomodo apostoli Christi Domini in primitiva
ecclesia suum illud Hierosolymis concilium celebraverint, et quanto cum fructu quan-
taque pace, quomodo item Romani pontifices in extrema mundi senecta, a quingentis et
amplius annis, sua illa concilia celebraverint […], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the
Elder, 1561 (Heinrich Bullinger: Bibliographie, vol. 1, ed. Joachim Staedtke, Zurich
1972 [HBBibl I], no. 402f.), 86r–110v.

11 Theodor Bibliander, De summa trinitate et fide catholica, Basel: Johannes Oporin,
1555 (Christian Moser, Theodor Bibliander [1505–1564]: Annotierte Bibliographie der
gedruckten Werke, Zurich 2009 [Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 27], no.
B–24).

12 Bullinger, De conciliis, 103r–v: »Quamvis autem definitionibus de fide propositis
nobis, per ista 4. Concilia oecumenica nihil prorsus velim derogatum, utpote qui illas
citra omnem contradictionem recipiam, et venerer religiosissime, potiorem tamen au-
thoritatem sanctis scripturis tribuo, quam ullis Conciliis. Illis enim sine alio testimonio,
propter semetipsis, credo. Conciliorum vero definitionibus non credo, nisi ea quae vel

Josias Simler and the Fathers

71

ger demands not strict adherence to the verbum of the Bible, but
acceptance of the doctrine contained therein (res).13 When seeking
to establish the meaning of scripture, the Reformed exegete may be
guided by extra-biblical writers and formulations, which serve as
valuable witnesses to the church’s historic understanding of bibli-
cal teaching and hence acquire a certain subsidiary authority, espe-
cially when the aim is to combat heresy. Bullinger gives the exam-
ple of the term homoousios in the Nicene creed, which was in-
troduced not as a »new dogma or article of faith« but »to provide
greater clarity« at a time when Arianism was threatening to over-
whelm the church.14 Although the ancient councils and Fathers are
by no means infallible – Bullinger finds examples of error even in
the canons of the much-venerated Council of Nicaea15 – their ru-
lings on the fundamental doctrines of God and Christ are to be
accepted without reservation, as the genuine teaching of scripture.
Simler follows him closely on this point, plotting a middle course
between unqualified acceptance of church tradition and the bibli-
cal literalism favoured by many religious radicals.

1.2 Christological controversies

The Zurichers’ engagement with early church history took place
against a backdrop of hardening confessional divisions. This is
especially true of the Scripta veterum, which had its genesis in
several distinct but interlocking disputes. Perhaps the most signi-
ficant of these was the exchange between the Zurich church and
the Württemberg Lutherans, led by Johannes Brenz (1499–1570).

credenda vel facienda aut omittenda proponent, per scripturas sanctas approbare pos-
sint.«

13 On this point, see Mark Taplin, The Italian Reformers and the Zurich Church, c.
1540–1620, Aldershot 2003 (St Andrews Studies in Reformation History), 208; Taplin,
Bullinger on the Trinity, 92–97.

14 Bullinger, De conciliis, 91v: »Sciendum est autem Patres synodi [of Nicaea] in hac
causa fidei, nihil prorsus suo permisisse ingenio aut suo indulsisse arbitrio, sed omnia
sequutos esse scripturam. Neque enim novum dogma, aut novum fidei articulum (quod
nulli licet Concilio) condiderunt, quin potius quod semper orthodoxi in ecclesia dei
crediderunt, Arii vero impietas iam corruperat, repararunt, adeoque quod vetustum ac
verum et confessum erat, scripturis illustrarunt muniveruntque contra Arium et contra
omnes alios qui paria cum Ario sentiebant et unquam docturi erant.«

15 Bullinger, De conciliis, 22r, 92r.

72

Mark Taplin

Relations between the two churches had begun to deteriorate in
the late 1550s, following the collapse of attempts by Theodore
Beza and Guillaume Farel to organise a German-Swiss synod, and
the imposition on the Württemberg pastorate of Brenz’s confession
on the Lord’s Supper.16 Although the dispute grew out of the long-
running Eucharistic schism, it quickly came to focus on Brenz’s
distinctive Christology. Both sides insisted on their fidelity to the
Chalcedonian definition of Christ as one hypostasis in two natures,
human and divine, but they differed radically in their understan-
ding of this formula. According to Zwingli and all subsequent Zu-
rich theologians, Christ’s two natures remain distinct ontologically
both throughout his earthly mission and following his glorificati-
on. Although it is orthodox (and scriptural) to say that God suf-
fered, was crucified and redeemed the world by his blood, such
expressions are to be taken as a »forma loquendi«, the attribution
to one nature of language that is properly applicable only to the
other – what Zwingli and Bullinger term alloiosis.17 For Brenz, by
contrast, the unity of Christ’s person necessitates a real, as oppo-
sed to merely verbal, communicatio idiomatum between his divi-
nity and humanity: specifically, the transmission of the attribute of
ubiquity to Christ’s human nature by virtue of its union with the
Word.18 From the Reformed perspective, Brenz’s conception of the
incarnation entailed an unacceptable blurring of the boundary bet-
ween the creator and the creaturely that threatened to turn Christ
into a tertium quid, neither fully human nor truly divine.

16 Amy Nelson Burnett, Heinrich Bullinger and the Problem of Eucharistic Concord,

in: Campi/Opitz, Bullinger, vol. 1, 233–250.

17 William Peter Stephens, The Theology of Huldrych Zwingli, Oxford 1986,
113–117; Peter Opitz, Heinrich Bullinger als Theologe: Eine Studie zu den »Dekaden«,
Zurich 2004, 189–191.

18 Hans Christian Brandy, Die späte Christologie des Johannes Brenz, Tübingen
1991 (Beiträge zur historischen Theologie 80), 175–178. The following passage illust-
rates the point: »Nos autem intelligimus in hac materia per ›idiomata‹ non tantum
vocabulorum, sed etiam rerum proprietates: ut cum per communicationem idiomatum
de Christo dicimus Deum esse passum et mortuum, non sit sententia, quod Deus ver-
bum dicatur tantum sermone vocabuli pati et mori, res autem ipsa nihil prorsus ad
Deum pertineat: sed quod Deus, etsi natura sua nec patitur nec moritur, tamen passi-
onem et mortem Christi ita sibi communem facit, ut propter hypostaticam unionem
passioni et morti personaliter adsit, et non aliter, ut si dicam, afficiatur, quam si ipse
pateretur et moreretur.« Theodor Mahlmann (ed.), Johannes Brenz: Die christologi-
schen Schriften, Tübingen 1981, 32–34.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

73

The appearance of Brenz’s De personali unione in early 1561,
which exposed the extent of these differences, was the trigger for a
protracted and increasingly bad-tempered polemical exchange bet-
ween Zurich and Tübingen.19 Between 1561 and 1564, Bullinger
published four works on the Christological issue: the Tractatio ver-
borum Domini, in domo patris mei mansiones multae sunt; the
Responsio, qua ostenditur sententiam de coelo et dextera Dei li-
bello Bullingeri non esse eversam, sed firmam perstare adhuc; the
Fundamentum firmum; and the Repetitio et dilucidior explicatio
consensus veteris ecclesiae in doctrina de inconfusis proprietatibus
naturarum Christi Domini.20 The controversy overshadowed the
final months of Peter Martyr Vermigli, who at the time of his death
(November 1562) was planning a second work against Brenz,21 to
add to his Dialogus in utraque Christi natura (1561).22 After a lull
of several years, it was reignited by the publication of Brenz’s theo-
logical testament, which subjected the Zurich church to scathing
criticism. During the first half of the 1570s, Reformed Christology
came under
sustained attack from Jakob Andreae
(1528–1590), the chancellor of Tübingen university.

further

Simler’s close ties to Bullinger and Vermigli ensured his invol-
vement in the Zurich church’s campaign against »ubiquitarianism«
from an early stage. In fact, he was personally acquainted with
Brenz, having visited Tübingen on Bullinger’s instructions in sum-

19 Brandy, Brenz, 45–68.
20 Heinrich Bullinger, Tractatio verborum Domini, in domo patris mei mansiones
multae sunt, Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Elder, 1561 (HBBibl I 416); Heinrich
Bullinger, Responsio, qua ostenditur sententiam de coelo et dextera Dei libello Bullin-
geri non esse eversam, sed firmam perstare adhuc, Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the
Elder, 1562 (HBBibl I 422f.); Heinrich Bullinger, Fundamentum firmum, cui tuto fidelis
quivis inniti potest, hoc praesertim difficili seculo, quo dissidiis doctorumque adversa-
riis scriptis omnia conturbata sunt, positum ad institutionem et consolationem simpli-
cium […], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Elder, 1563 (HBBibl I 425); Heinrich
Bullinger, Repetitio et dilucidior explicatio consensus veteris orthodoxae catholicaeque
Christi Ecclesiae in doctrina prophetica et apostolica, de inconfusis proprietatibus na-
turarum Christi Domini, in una indivisa persona permanentibus […], Zurich: Christoph
Froschauer the Elder, 1564 (HBBibl I 427).

21 Erland Herkenrath, Peter Martyr Vermiglis Vorarbeit zu einer zweiten christolo-
gischen Schrift gegen Johannes Brenz, in: Blätter für württembergische Kirchengeschich-
te 75 (1975), 23–31.

22 Peter Martyr Vermigli, Dialogus de utraque in Christo natura, Zurich: Christoph

Froschauer the Elder, 1561 (BZD C 599f.).

74

Mark Taplin

mer 1553, when relations between Zurich and Württemberg were
still on a relatively friendly footing.23 Much later, in his funeral
oration for Vermigli, Simler recorded the latter’s deathbed con-
demnation of Brenz’s theology.24 Among the many works by Bul-
linger that Simler translated into Latin was the Zurich church’s
official response to Brenz’s testament, which appeared only a few
months before the Scripta veterum.25 At Bullinger’s request, he also
produced, for the benefit of Theodore Beza, a Latin translation of
the section of the testament dealing with the Lord’s Supper.26 The
Scripta veterum was conceived of, in part, as a contribution to the
on-going Christological exchange between Lutherans and Refor-
med, which had already spawned numerous editions of patristic
florilegia,27 and to which Simler was to return later in his career.28
The addition of a historical section, the Narratio, to Simler’s an-
thology reflects the terms of debate in the controversy, in which
each side strove to associate its opponents with one or more an-
cient heresies. Thus while Brenz painted the Reformed as latter-day
Arians and Nestorians, who reduced Christ to the rank of a mere
saint,29 he himself was charged with reviving the error of Eutyches
and other monophysites. Bullinger alludes to these ancient debates
frequently in his Christological writings. In the Fundamentum fir-
mum, he reviews the history of the Nestorian and Eutychian con-
troversies, while the Repetitio et dilucidior explicatio includes a
short account of disputes concerning the incarnation from Con-

23 Andreas Mühling, Heinrich Bullingers europäische Kirchenpolitik, Bern et al.

2001 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 19), 51.

24 Josias Simler, Oratio de vita et obitu viri optimi [...] Petri Martyris Vermilii [...],
Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Younger, 1563 (BZD C 733), 27r: »Alio item die cum
Bullingerus inter alia consolationis causa e Paulo dixisset, nostram politiam in coelo
esse, agnosco inquit ille, sed non in coelo Brentii, quod nusquam est.«

25 Ad Testamentum D. Ioannis Brentii, nuper contra Zvinglianos publicatum, re-
sponsio brevis […], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Younger, 1571 (HBBibl I 569).
26 Correspondance de The´odore de Be`ze, ed. Fernand Aubert et al., Geneva 1960ff.

[CTB], vol. 12, 29 (no. 818).

27 See Paul Strawn, Cyril of Alexandria as a Source for Martin Chemnitz, in: Die
Patristik in der Bibelexegese des 16. Jahrhunderts, ed. David C. Steinmetz, Wiesbaden
1999 (Wolfenbütteler Forschungen 85), 225–227.

28 Cf. Josias Simler, De vera Iesu Christi, domini et servatoris nostri, secundum
humanam naturam in his terris praesentia, orthodoxa et brevis expositio […], Zurich:
Christoph Froschauer the Younger, 1574 (BZD C 877).

29 Mahlmann, Die christologischen Schriften, 212, 228, 296, 324.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

75

stantine to Heraclius.30 Much of the same material is recycled in
the Narratio, although Simler’s work testifies to a much more in-
tensive engagement with the ancient sources.

Just as the ubiquitarian controversy was getting underway, the
Zurich church found itself confronted by another challenge to Re-
formed Christology, this time from eastern Europe. The dispute
was sparked off by Francesco Stancaro (1501–1574), an Italian
religious exile who had previously been instrumental in establis-
hing the Polish Reformed church. After several years in Hungary,
Stancaro returned to Poland in 1559, where his views on the me-
diatorial office of Christ became the subject of heated debate.31
Like Zwingli and Bullinger, Stancaro was anxious to preserve the
distinction of natures within Christ’s person, but from this doc-
trine he drew the unacceptably »Nestorian« conclusion that Christ
must have acted as mediator in his human nature alone. Stancaro
regarded the suggestion that Christ’s divinity co-operated with his
manhood in the atonement as tantamount to Arianism, on the
basis that it turned the Word into a supplicant and, consequently,
subordinated him to the Father. However, the majority of Protes-
tants in Poland-Lithuania found Stancaro’s opinions abhorrent,
and in June 1559 he was excommunicated by the common-
wealth’s Reformed synod. At their Polish correspondents’ request,
the Zurich divines penned two open letters denouncing Stancaro’s
views, which were published in March 1561.32 The following year,
Stancaro responded with his work De Trinitate et mediatore Do-
mino nostro Iesu Christo, in which he lambasted Bullinger, Ver-
migli and Calvin for introducing inequality within the Trinity and
confusing the two natures of Christ. Accustomed to being labelled
Nestorians by the likes of Brenz and Andreae, the Zurichers now
found themselves accused for the first time of heresies from the
other end of the Christological spectrum, such as Eutychianism
and monotheletism.

30 Bullinger, Fundamentum firmum, 117v–121r; Bullinger, Repetitio, 28r–30v.
31 Taplin, Italian Reformers, 171–181.
32 Epistolae duae, ad ecclesias polonicas, Iesu Christi Evangelium amplexas […] de
negotio Stancariano, et mediatore Dei et hominum Iesu Christo, an hic secundum hu-
manam naturam duntaxat, an secundum utranque mediator sit, Zurich: Christoph Fro-
schauer the Elder, 1561 (HBBibl I 421).

76

Mark Taplin

The task of rebutting these charges fell to Simler, who had just
been appointed professor of Old Testament at the Zurich academy
in succession to Vermigli. In his Responsio ad maledicum Francisci
Stancari Mantuani librum (1563), Simler denied that the Reformed
understanding of the atonement compromised God’s unity and
that assigning a mediatorial function to Christ’s godhead involved
a confusion of the two natures. Against the »hyper-Zwinglian«
Stancaro, Simler was able to develop the Zurich church’s under-
standing of the unity of Christ’s person more fully than was pos-
sible in dialogue with the »Eutychians« of Württemberg. While
continuing to resist any suggestion of a real communication of
properties between the two natures, as proposed by Brenz, he
maintained that Christ’s divinity plays a full and necessary part in
his salvific mission. Although impassible, the Logos is not a by-
stander in the atonement, but the guarantor of its efficacy, as only
one who is both human and divine can truly reconcile God with
mankind.33 Like the ubiquitarian controversy, the conflict between
the Zurichers and Stancaro was fought out on the terrain of early
church history; indeed, the Responsio provides the first evidence of
Simler’s interest in the ancient Christological debates that he was
to explore more fully in the Scripta veterum. In the final part of the
work, a range of Latin and Greek authors are invoked in support
of the Zurich position.34 Because Stancaro had accused the Zuri-
chers of favouring positions anathematised by the Third Council of
Constantinople (680–681), Simler is also at pains to demonstrate
the compatibility of Reformed teaching with that council’s pro-
nouncements.35

By the time of the Responsio’s publication, the focus of theolo-
gical debate in Poland had shifted from Stancaro to another Italian
exile, Giorgio Biandrata (c. 1515–1588). At this stage in his career,
Biandrata was an advocate of the form of the antitrinitarianism
dubbed »tritheism« by the orthodox: embracing what Stancaro
insisted were the logical consequences of the Reformed doctrine of

33 Josias Simler, Responsio ad maledicum Francisci Stancari Mantuani librum ad-
versus Tigurinae ecclesiae ministros, de Trinitate et mediatore Domino nostro Iesu
Christo […], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Elder, 1563 (BZD C 636), 7r–v.

34 Simler, Responsio ad Stancari librum, 33v–44v.
35 Simler, Responsio ad Stancari librum, 10r, 29v–30r.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

77

the mediator, he reconceptualised the Trinity as a hierarchy of
three distinct beings, united in will rather than substance.36 To the
Zurichers’ consternation, Biandrata found a ready audience among
the Polish Reformed, many of whom had grown uncomfortable
with the »sophistic« and non-scriptural language that they asso-
ciated with the received doctrine of the Trinity. By the end of 1562,
the Polish Reformed synod had splintered into orthodox and tri-
theist factions, led by Stanisław Sarnicki and Grzegorz Paweł re-
spectively.

Simler spearheaded the Zurich church’s intervention in the Po-
lish schism. In the preface to his Responsio ad Stancari librum, he
answered the tritheist arguments set out in Paweł’s Tabula de Tri-
nitate;37 it is likely that he also had a hand in the detailed rebuttal
of Paweł’s text issued by the Zurichers in spring 1563.38 Simler’s
status as the acknowledged Reformed authority on triadological
matters was cemented by the publication in August 1568 of his
massive De aeterno Dei filio, written at the behest of the Polish
»major« or orthodox Reformed church.39 In De aeterno, Simler
highlighted the emergence of a new and more subversive form of
antitrinitarianism – labelled »Samosatenianism«, after the third-
century heretic Paul of Samosata, by the orthodox – which denied
not only the consubstantiality and co-equality of the three divine
persons, but even the pre-existence of Christ. For information,
Simler drew on wide variety of sources, including works by the
tritheists Valentino Gentile, Matteo Gribaldi and Jan Kazanowski,
Lelio Sozzini’s commentary on the Johannine prologue, the Dia-
logi XXX of Bernardino Ochino and the Sylvae of Andrzej Frycz

36 Taplin, Italian Reformers, 182–184.
37 Simler, Responsio ad Stancari librum, *3v–6v.
38 Responsio ministrorum Tigurinae ecclesiae ad argumenta Antitrinitariorum Ita-
lopolonorum (Zurich State Archive, E II 371, 931–935). On this work, see Taplin,
Italian Reformers, 190f.; Taplin, Bullinger on the Trinity, 88. Sarnicki published the
»Responsio« in a volume entitled »Iudicium et censura ecclesiarum piarum de dogmate
[…] contra adorandam Trinitatem per quosdam turbulentes noviter sparso« (Cracow
1563). For details, see Alodia Kawecka-Gryczowa, Polonia typographica saeculi sede-
cimi, XI: Maciej Wirzbie˛ta, Wrocław 1975, 5, 27.

39 Josias Simler, De aeterno Dei filio domino et servatore nostro Iesu Christo, et de
Spiritu sancto, adversus veteres et novos Antitrinitarios, id est Arianos, Tritheitas, Sa-
mosatenianos, et Pneumatomachos, libri quatuor […], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer
the Younger, 1568 (BZD C 798).

78

Mark Taplin

Modrzewski.40 Many of these works were dispatched by Reformed
contacts in Poland and Transylvania, who continued to supply him
with new heretical publications well into the 1570s.41 Although in
De aeterno Simler’s focus was on the doctrine of God, his defence
of trinitarian orthodoxy necessarily involved some consideration
of Christological issues. Significantly, he relied on the Chalcedo-
nian Definition to counter many »Arian« objections to the full
divinity of the Son, on the basis that it allowed those scriptural
texts that appeared to suggest Christ’s inferiority to the Father to
be referred, as was proper, to his human nature.42

De aeterno formed part of a co-ordinated Reformed campaign
against antitrinitarianism, other contributions to which included
the collection Valentini Gentilis impietatum et triplicis perfidiae ac
periurii brevis explicatio (1567), edited by Beza, and Girolamo
Zanchi’s De tribus Elohim (1572).43 The controversy acted as a
stimulus to renewed engagement with the Fathers, whose refuta-
tions of Arianism provided the Reformed with both an inspiring
model for their own efforts and a treasure trove of arguments to be
redeployed against contemporary »heretics«. In August 1570, Beza
published an anthology of patristic texts in defence of the Trinity,
with a dedication to the Polish Reformed.44 The pages of De ae-

40 Taplin, Italian Reformers, 199f.
41 Taplin, Italian Reformers, 200, n. 115. See also Theodor Wotschke (ed.), Der
Briefwechsel der Schweizer mit den Polen, Leipzig 1908, 187, 206, 240f., 286, 345,
375f.

42 Simler, De aeterno, 278v–82r. Simler noted that the antitrinitarianism of Gentile
and other tritheists was coupled with a monophysite Christology. See ibid., 110r, 152r–
156v.

43 Beza’s correspondence witnesses to his close co-operation with Simler in this mat-
ter. Prior to the publication of De aeterno, he encouraged Simler to write against Modr-
zewski and other antitrinitarians (CTB 8, 135, 148 [nos 560, 564]; CTB 9, 53f. [no.
600]). After receiving a copy of the completed work from Simler (CTB 9, 121, 128, 132
[nos 625, 627, 629]), which he praised as a »librum vere aureum«, Beza abandoned his
own plans for a refutation of »omnes adversus ipsam Christi personam excitatas ha-
ereses«, on the grounds that Simler had dealt satisfactorily with all such errors (CTB 9,
141 [no. 631]; CTB 10, 226 [no. 716]; CTB 11, 190 [no. 782]). However, the two
theologians continued to exchange antitrinitarian texts forwarded to them by their
eastern European correspondents. For Simler’s contacts with Zanchi, see Taplin, Italian
Reformers, 226.

44 Athanasii Dialogi V de sancta Trinitate, Basilii libri IIII adversus impium Euno-
mium, Athanasii et Cyrili Compendiaria fidei explicatio […] Foebadi sive Foebadii liber
contra Arianos, [Geneva]: Henri Estienne II, 1570. For Beza’s introduction, see CTB 9,

Josias Simler and the Fathers

79

terno itself are replete with citations from the Fathers, especially
Hilary, Ambrose, the Cappadocians, Cyril and Augustine. When
defending the divinity of the Holy Spirit, Simler also makes use of
other extra-biblical texts, such as ancient hymns in which the third
person of the Trinity is invoked.45 For Simler, as for Bullinger, such
statements are to be valued as witnesses to the correct, »catholic«
understanding of the Bible. The same applies to the technical terms
(»Trinity«, »person«, »essence« and so on) that the church has
adopted to express its understanding of the God, which do not add
to but merely encapsulate scriptural teaching.46

Although Simler cut his teeth as a polemicist in conflict with
opponents based primarily in eastern Europe, the publication of
the Scripta veterum was hastened by events closer to home. For
decades, the Zurich church had been the chief provider of advice,
theological leadership and practical support to the Reformed com-
munities of the Rhaetian Freestate (Graubünden). Cases of Ana-
baptism had been reported in the Freestate’s largest town, Chur,
ever since the early years of the Reformation, but the issue became
particularly acute in the late 1560s, following the return to Grau-
bünden of Georg Frell, a former employee of the Zurich printer
Froschauer. Tobias Egli, the senior Reformed minister in Chur,
complained in letters to Bullinger that Frell was disseminating
Schwenckfeldian works, absenting himself from church services
and refusing to have his newborn child baptised.47 Eventually the
town authorities lost patience, expelled Frell from Chur and or-
dered the confiscation of his books. Of equal concern to Egli were
the activities of religious dissidents, especially antitrinitarians, in
the Reformed churches of the Rhaetian »subject lands«: the Ita-
lian-speaking territories of Chiavenna, the Valtellina and Bormio.

319–330. Most of the works included in the collection were of dubious authenticity,
but because of their theological significance Beza was inclined to overlook these pro-
blems. See the discussion in Irena Backus, Historical Method and Confessional Identity
in the Era of the Reformation (1378–1615), Leiden 2003 (Studies in Medieval and
Reformation Thought 94), 173–183.

45 Simler, De aeterno, 329r–v.
46 Simler, De aeterno, 159v–61r, 248v–51r.
47 Simon Rageth and Oskar Vasella, Die Autobiographie des Täufers Georg Frell
von Chur, in: Zwingliana 7/7 (1942), 444–469; Nicole Peduzzi, Der Gantnerhandel im
Licht des Verfolgungsberichts des Bündner Buchbinders Georg Frell, in: Zwingliana 34
(2007), 61–94.

80

Mark Taplin

In Chiavenna, the newly appointed minister Scipione Lentolo took
steps to discipline the radicals,48 but other local clergy were less
than supportive; Girolamo Turriani, the pastor in nearby Piuro,
went so far as to receive excommunicated former members of
Lentolo’s congregation into his church. To overcome such oppo-
sition, Lentolo and his supporters appealed above Turriani’s head
to the Reformed church leadership in Chur, arguing that decisive
magisterial intervention was required to rid Graubünden of here-
sy.49

Lentolo’s reports of antitrinitarian activity in the subject lands,
together with his own recent experience of dealing with Frell, con-
vinced Egli of the need for action. In June 1570, the Rhaetian Diet
issued an edict requiring all inhabitants to adhere to one of the
Freestate’s two recognised faiths, Catholicism and Reformed Pro-
testantism as defined by the Rhaetic and Second Helvetic Confes-
sions. The measure encountered resistance both in the subject
lands and in Chur, where Egli’s fellow minister, Johannes Gantner,
was dismissed after advocating religious toleration from the pul-
pit.50 Gantner’s sentiments were echoed by the Cremonese exile
Bartolomeo Silvio, minister in Lentolo’s old parish of Monte di
Sondrio. In September 1570, Silvio sent Bullinger a copy of a short
tract that he had written against the edict, in which the imposition
of subscription was condemned as a return to the »tyrannical«
practices of the papacy.51 Moreover, Silvio claimed that it would
harm the cause of Protestantism in the subject lands, where the
Reformed were a tiny minority, by driving the »weak in faith«
back into the arms of the Catholic church.

Any hopes that Silvio may have nursed of securing a sympathetic
hearing for his arguments were quickly dashed; if anything, his
intervention seems to have prompted the Zurichers to redouble
their efforts in support of Egli’s anti-heretical campaign. In No-
vember 1570, Bullinger sent his Bündner counterpart a copy of

48 Emanuele Fiume, Scipione Lentolo (1525–1599): »Quotidie laborans in evangelii

causa«, Turin 2003, 138–142; Taplin, Italian Reformers, 227–232.

49 Fiume, Lentolo, 143; Taplin, Italian Reformers, 233.
50 Erich Wenneker, Heinrich Bullinger und der Gantnerhandel in Chur (1570–1574),

in: Zwingliana 24 (1997), 95–115.

51 Zurich Zentralbibliothek [ZB], Ms. F 61, 343r–348r. For a fuller analysis of the

work, see Taplin, Italian Reformers, 235–237.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

81

Beza’s De haereticis a civili magistratu puniendis libellus (1554)
for use against Gantner; over subsequent months, he offered Egli
detailed advice on how to proceed against the radicals at the forth-
coming Reformed synod, where their case was due to be heard.52
Public endorsement of the Rhaetian Diet’s actions was offered by
Bullinger’s deputy Rudolf Gwalther, whose Six Sermons on the
Incarnation of the Son of God, published in early 1571, were de-
dicated to Stefan Willi, Bürgermeister of Chur. In his preface to the
work, Gwalther upheld the magistrate’s duty to maintain »unity in
doctrine and in faith« (»einigkeit in der leer und im glauben«),
brushing aside arguments for toleration.53 With the Scripta vete-
rum, Simler sought to give a further boost to the Rhaetian church
leadership, whose attempts to impose doctrinal uniformity conti-
nued to be opposed both by a recalcitrant minority within the
synod and by notables sympathetic to Gantner and Turriani. In a
letter dated 28 May 1571, Egli recalled discussing the projected
work with Simler in Zurich and suggested that his correspondent
dedicate it to the three Rhaetian Leagues, so as to encourage more
rigorous implementation of the edict.54 The timing of the volume’s
publication was calculated to be of maximum benefit to Egli and
his supporters: it followed hard on the heels of the synodical me-
eting of June 1571, at which Silvio, Turriani and Gantner’s close
ally Johannes Möhr were suspended from the ministry, and the-
reby served to give the Zurich church’s official imprimatur to those
punishments.55

1.3 Prefaces

In his main preface to the Scripta veterum – addressed, as Egli had
suggested, to the Rhaetian Leagues – and in a second, shorter de-
dication to the Christian reader, Simler responds directly to the
crisis facing the Bündner church.56 While praising the Rhaetians

52 Wenneker, Gantnerhandel, 109–111; Taplin, Italian Reformers, 245.
53 Rudolf Gwalther, Die Menschwerdung deß waarenn, ewigen und eingebornen
suns Gottes unsers Herren Jesu Christi erklärt und ußgelegt in sechs predigen, diser zyt
allerley secten nützlich zuoläsen […], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Younger, 1571
(BZD C 835), 6v–7v. For details, see Taplin, Italian Reformers, 242–244.

54 ZB Ms. F 59, 410r.
55 Taplin, Italian Reformers, pp. 245–6.

82

Mark Taplin

for their devotion to liberty and support for learning, he warns
that the Freestate’s geographical location makes it uniquely vul-
nerable to the »contagion« of heresy. From Germany it is assailed
by Anabaptists and Schwenckfeldians – a clear reference to Frell
and his supporters – while from south of the Alps arises the equally
grave threat of antitrinitarianism, now transplanted to Rhaetian
soil by Italian exiles in the churches of Piuro, Chiavenna and the
Valtellina. In these movements, Simler claims to see not a new
phenomenon but rather the recrudescence of two distinct ancient
heresies: Eutychianism, which calls into question Christ’s true hu-
manity; and the teachings of Paul of Samosata, which rob him of
his divinity.57 The comment helps explain not just how Simler vie-
wed the radical challenge, but his choice of a patristic edition as
the vehicle for his response. By making the situation of the Rha-
etian Reformed analogous to that of the writers featured in the
Scripta veterum, Simler aimed to demonstrate the transferability of
their arguments to the theological debates of his own day, just as
Beza had done in his edition of patristic writings on the Trinity.
Although this approach exposed the Fathers to anachronistic mis-
readings, by wrenching them out of their historical and intellectual
context, it added a powerful polemical dimension to Simler’s scho-
larship. The establishment of a typological connection between an-
cient and contemporary controversies authorised users of the
Scripta veterum to comb through its contents in search of material
that, taken in isolation, could be made to validate the Reformed
position on a host of contested topics.

Having identified the specific doctrinal positions that his work is
intended to combat, Simler turns his attention to the broader issues
at stake in the Rhaetian dispute. Like Gwalther, he justifies the

56 On Simler’s prefaces, see Massimo Firpo, Antitrinitari nell’Europa orientale del
’500: Nuovi testi di Szymon Budny, Niccolo` Paruta e Iacopo Paleologo, Florence 1977,
1–8; Taplin, Italian Reformers, 195f., 247–249.

57 Simler, Scripta veterum, *2v: »Nam Eutychea dogmata nostra aetate tuentur cum
Anabaptistae tum Schwenckfeldiani, quorum audio non exiguum numerum delitescere
in Vindelicia et Rhetia secunda, ut hac quidem in parte periculum vobis immineat, ne ex
Germania mali contagio ad vos serpat. Caeterum non minus etiam periculi imminet
vobis ab altero latere Italiam versus, nam illic ante annos aliquot impius ille Servetus,
pestifera sua dogmata similia Samosathenicis furoribus, clam sparsit, ea multi fovent,
ornant et excolunt, qui cum alibi locum nullum habere possint, cavendum vobis est ne
ficta sanctimonia sese commendare et apud vos sibi refugium aliquod parare conentur.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

83

Bündner Diet’s suppression of heresy on the basis of the magis-
trate’s cura religionis, finding historical precedents for the edict in
the actions of the Israelite kings and early Christian emperors.58
Objections to magisterial interference in religious affairs, on the
grounds that faith is »free« and cannot be coerced, are dismissed
as baseless, for the intention of the secular power is not to force
consciences but to prevent blasphemy and maintain »the external
discipline of doctrine and manners«, lest the corpus christianum be
exposed to corruption.59 Although the Mosaic penalties for false
prophesy and witchcraft derive from judicial laws issued specifi-
cally to the people of Israel under the old covenant, they are of
universally applicability »as far as their substance is concerned«.60
If a ruler is obliged to protect his subjects from crimes against the
body, it follows that he must guard against threats to the welfare
of their souls.61 Toleration even of those who refrain from open
profession of heresy is hazardous, as such persons may continue to
disseminate their errors in secret.62 Following Augustine, Simler
suggests that the imposition of external conformity may actually
be of benefit to those affected, helping them, in the fullness of time,
to embrace the orthodox faith with genuine conviction.63

58 Simler, Scripta veterum, *3r, [*5v].
59 Simler, Scripta veterum, *3r–v: »Sed cum magistratus haereticum punit, non id
praecipue facit, ut vi eum rectius credere cogat. Si enim hic finis magistratui propositus
esset, in nullum quantumvis sceleratum capite animadvertere liceret, sed id in puniendo
spectat, ut iniuriam seu blasphemiam maiestati Dei procaciter factam ulciscatur, ut
doctrinae et morum externam politiam conservet. Nisi vero contumaces perturbatores
sanae doctrinae coerceantur, et exemplo in unum edito reliqui contineantur in officio,
ut etsi non idem ex verbo Dei cum caeteris sentient, saltem hoc ab ipsis extorquebitur,
ut vel alio se conferant, vel intra se contineant suas pravas opiniones, et non modico
fermento totam massam corrumpant.«

60 Simler, Scripta veterum, *4v: »Leges quas iam recitavimus, iudiciales quidem
sunt, sed tamen quantum ad ipsam substantiam earum spectat, morales sunt, ideoque
omnium temporum communes, atque ut leges Mosaicae quae depositum reddi et furem
puniri iubent, politicae sunt, et hactenus solos Israelitas obligant, quia tamen naturalem
aequitatem sequuntur, et perpetuum illud Decalogi praeceptum, ne fureris, explicant,
hactenus morales sunt, et omnes et illas praestandas tenemur, eadem ratio est praesen-
tium legum.« Cf. Gwalther, Menschwerdung, 6v.

61 Simler, Scripta veterum, [*5r], [**6v].
62 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6v].
63 Simler, Scripta veterum, *3v. Cf. Augustine, De correctione Donatistarum (Cor-
pus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum latinorum [CSEL], vol. 57, Vienna 1911, 1–44; Pa-

84

Mark Taplin

Simler attacks the edict’s opponents as »Academici«, thereby
associating them with Sebastian Castellio and other critics of Ser-
vetus’s execution, to whom the label had first been applied. Ac-
cording to Simler, their ultimate aim is to uproot true Christianity,
with its doctrines of God, Christ and salvation, and replace it with
a watered-down »philosophical« religion grounded on upright li-
ving, rather than faith. The »Academici« accuse their Reformed
opponents of imposing a narrow dogmatism, but all that is de-
manded is adherence to the core tenets of the Gospel.64 Their own
approach, which places in doubt even the most basic doctrinal
propositions, is the diametrical opposite of Christianity; if tolera-
ted, it will lead to a proliferation of sects and, eventually, a drift
towards impiety and Epicureanism.65

Although Simler avoids mentioning Silvio by name, it is clear
from the contents of his second preface, in particular, that he was
familiar with the latter’s treatise, which may have been passed on
to him by Bullinger.66 Thus he is sceptical of Silvio’s claim that the
Rhaetian authorities’ actions will force waverers to return to Ca-
tholicism, noting that Mass attendance is required only of those
who refuse to subscribe to the Reformed confessions. Silvio’s ap-
peal to his fellow ministers to imitate the example of Paul, who in
Romans 14 advised that the »weakness« of Jewish converts be
accommodated, is also given short shrift; as Simler points out, the
same writer condemns those »pseudo-apostles« who made justifi-
cation dependent on observance of the Law. The distinction that
Silvio posits between »infant« and »adult« Christians is rejected
on the authority of Irenaeus, who insists against the Gnostics on
the common faith of all believers.67

trologiae cursus completus [Series Latina], ed. Jacques Paul Migne, 217 vols, Paris
1844–1855 [PL], vol. 33, 792–815) 2,7.

64 Simler, Scripta veterum, *3v.
65 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6v].
66 Simler also possessed a copy of Lentolo’s refutation of the work, the »Responsio
orthodoxa« (Fiume, Lentolo, 171f.). In a letter to the Bürgermeisters of Chur, Ambro-
sius Marti and Stefan Willi, he describes the »Scripta veterum« as his riposte to com-
plaints received »muntlich und schrifftlich« about the edict and the »große tyranny« of
subscription (Zurich Zentralbibliothek, Ms F 46, 348–351). See Taplin, Italian Refor-
mers, 248, n. 144.

67 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6r]: »Errant autem qui haec dicunt in eo quod fir-
morum et infirmorum, lactentium et adultorum discrimen circa dogmata fidei statuunt,

Josias Simler and the Fathers

85

Silvio’s final objection to subscription – that it detracts from the
authority of scripture – is the most serious. For Silvio, the entire
substance of Christian doctrine is encapsulated in the Apostles’
Creed; more elaborate confessions, he suggests, have a tendency to
elevate human teachings over revelation, the chief error of the pa-
pacy. In response, Simler argues that profession of the Apostles’
Creed, or even a general adherence to scripture, would be suffici-
ent »if cunning men did not seek by fraudulent means to twist the
simplicity of the faith set out in them«.68 Unfortunately, the church
has found itself compelled to devise more precise creedal state-
ments, of which the Rhaetic Confession is one, to exclude such
perverse interpretations. To illustrate how scripture may be abu-
sed, Simler cites the example of the Servetians, who, while claiming
to accept the biblical teaching that Christ is the son of both God
and man and himself truly divine, preach a Christ who is none of
those things.69 The refusal on principle of the edict’s opponents to

cum aliter se habeat: nam Paulus qui tolleravit Iudaeos ceremonias legis servantes,
pseudoapostolos minime tolleravit qui iustificationem in his ipsis reponebant, imo pro-
nuntiat Christum talibus nihil prodesse: an vero credendum est eum cum infirmis factus
est infirmus, quicquam circa dogmata vel immutasse vel dissimulasse? Sed ne meam
sententiam afferam, Irenaei vetustissimi scriptoris verba adscribam, quibus eandem fi-
dem omnium qui in ecclesia sunt firmorum et infirmorum, discipulorum et magistrorum
asserit. ›Quemadmodum‹, inquit, ›Sol creatura Dei unus et idem est in universo mundo,
ita et praedicatio veritatis: ubique lucet, et illuminat omnes homines qui ad notionem
veritatis venire volunt. Nec sane qui inter praefectos ecclesiae praepollet facundia ab his
diversa dicturus est (nemo enim est supra magistrum) nec is qui minus valet dicendo,
traditionem hanc imminuet. Nam cum una sit eademque fides, nec is, qui multum de ea
dicere potest, superfluit, nec qui parum imminuit. Plus autem aut minus quosdam nosse
secundum intelligentiam quam acceperunt, non efficitur mutatione hypothesis, aut ex-
cogitatione alterius Dei praetor Demiurgum et factorem et nutritorem universi, etc.‹«
Cf. Irenaeus of Lyon, Adversus haereses (ed. W. Wigan Harvey, 2 vols, Cambridge
1857; PG 7, 433–1225), 1,10,1. For the passage to which Simler is responding, see ZB
Ms. F 61, 345r–v, cited in Taplin, Italian Reformers, 236, n. 89.

68 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6r]: »Satis quidem esset simplex professio fidei apos-
tolicae, aut generalis subscriptio sacrarum literarum, nisi simplicitatem fidei in his pro-
positam homines vafri fraudulentis artibus in alienum sensum detorquerent, id quod
etiam de sui temporis haereticis Hilarius conqueritur.«

69 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6r–v]: »Tradunt nobis scripturae Christum servatorem
nostrum unum et eundem esse filium Dei et filium hominis, verum Deum et vitam
aeternam, hoc Servetani secundum scripturas se credere profitentur. Sed eum Christum
nobis proponent, qui neque vere Dei neque etiam hominis filius sit, natus quidem ex
virgine, sed substantiam habens ex tribus nescio quibus increatis elementis iuxta Ser-
vetum, qui sit aeternus praedestinationis non existentiae ratione, quique sit Deus verus

86

Mark Taplin

countenance »man-made« confessions is fundamentally miscon-
ceived; for their opposition to the Rhaetic confession to be justi-
fied, they must be able to demonstrate not merely that it contains
extra-biblical terminology but that it contradicts scripture.70 Simler
sees their position as foreshadowed in the attitude of earlier »her-
etics«, specifically the Arians, who opposed the introduction of the
clarifying term homoousios in order that they might »more easily
impose their errors on the simple«, and the Eutychians, who for
similar reasons refused to countenance Chalcedon’s additions to
the Nicene Creed.71 Conversely, there are numerous early church
precedents for the practice of subscription, which is endorsed by
no less a writer than Hilary of Poitiers.72 Simler’s appropriation
here of patristric authority in support of the orthodox Reformed
position sets the tone for the remainder of his work, the central
purpose of which is to align Zwinglian Christology with the te-
aching of the Fathers.

postquam scilicet Deificatus est, et nomine ac potestate Dei donatus post resurrectionem
a mortuis.«

70 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6v]: »si nolunt subscriptione suam fidem hominum
verbis astringere, ostendant nobis ubi a scripturis haec confessio dissentiat, confutent
eam, et contrariam sententiam scripturis confirment, nemo tam iniquus est, qui illos
audire nolet scripturis pugnantes: id si non audent, an non suam pervicaciam produnt,
qui ea damnant et reiiciunt quae tamen confutare non possunt?«

71 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6v]: »Porro ut olim Ariani oppugnabant τοÁ οë μοου Â -
σιον a Nicaena Synodo usurpatum, ut e medio sublato hoc vocabulo, quo res maximae
explicabantur, facilius imponere possent simplicioribus: et ut postea Eutychiani ad te-
gendam suam impietatem iactabant se Nicaenam fidem sequi, Chalcedonense autem
decretum quo detegebatur eorum improbitas oppugnabant: ita hodie multi piarum ec-
clesiarum confessiones orthodoxas non alio consilio oppugnant, quam ut liberius spar-
gere possint sua prophana figmenta.«

72 Simler, Scripta veterum, [**6v]: »Neque debet molestum videri piis quod scripto
testari debeant suam fidem, cum huc adigant ecclesiam versutiae et fraudulentae so-
phisticaque cavillationes multorum, neque me movet quod dicunt veterem ecclesiam
oris confessione contentam fuisse, cum liceat contraria ex historiis exempla proferre: et
Hilarius, ›Ubique‹, inquit, ›scandala, ubique perfidiae sunt: hinc illud est, ut ad profes-
sionem subscribendae fidei, aliqui eorum qui antea aliud scripserant cogerentur.‹« The
quoted passage is from Hilary of Poitiers, De synodis (PL 10, 479–546) 63.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

87

2. Texts and sources

2.1 Texts

The earliest of the works published in the Scripta veterum is De
incarnatione Domini contra Nestorium libri VII, by John Cassian
(c. 360–432). Although Cassian spent his final years in Gaul, as a
»Scythian« from the Dobrudja he was equally at home in Latin
and Greek; this bilingualism, together with his extensive knowled-
ge of monastic communities in Palestine and Egypt, equipped him
to play an important role in the transmission of eastern ascetic
traditions to the West. De incarnatione can be dated quite precisely
to the summer of 430, as it formed the basis for the condemnation
of Nestorius by Pope Celestine I in August that year.73 Simler’s text
is based on the first printed edition of the work, by the antiquarian
Johannes Sichardus, which was published by Andreas Cratander in
Basel.74

In the preface to De incarnatione, Cassian indicates that the
work was written at the request of the Roman archdeacon Leo,
later Pope Leo I (440–461). The Scripta veterum features two of
Leo’s own writings: his letter to Flavian of Constantinople, usually
known as the Tome,75 and a subsequent letter on Christology to
the Emperor Leo I.76 Simler had access to the Cologne edition of
Leo’s works, first published by Peter Canisius in 154677 and reis-
sued, with revisions by Laurentius Surius, in 1561 and 1569.78 As

73 John A. McGuckin, St Cyril of Alexandria and the Christological Controversy: Its
History, Theology, and Texts, Leiden 1994 (Supplements to Vigiliae christianae 23), 37,
42.

74 Ioannis Cassiani viri dissertisimi de incarnatione Domini libri VII. iam recens
aediti […], Basel: Andreas Cratander, 1534 (Verzeichnis der im deutschen Sprachbe-
reich erschienenen Drucke des XVI. Jahrhunderts, Stuttgart 1983–2000 [VD 16], no. J
391). See Josias Simler, Bibliotheca instituta et collecta primum a Conrado Gesnero […],
Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Younger, 1574 (BZD C 873), 353.

75 Acta conciliorum oecumenicorum, ed. Eduard Schwartz et al., Berlin 1927–1971
[ACO1], vol. 2.2, 24–33; Conciliorum oecumenicorum decreta, ed. Giuseppe Alberigo
et al., Bologna 31973, 77–82; PL 54, 755–782.
76 ACO1 2.4, 113–131; PL 54, 1155–1190.
77 D. Leonis papae huius nominis primi opera, quae quidem extant omnia, Cologne:

Melchior von Neuß, 1546 (VD 16 L 1201).

78 D. Leonis eius nominis I. Romani pontificis opera, quae quidem haberi potuerunt,

88

Mark Taplin

perhaps the definitive statement of the Christology of the western
church, the Tome was reprinted several times during the sixteenth
century – for example, in Basilius Heroldt’s Orthodoxographa,
Johann Jakob Grynaeus’s Monumenta and Peter Crabbe’s edition
of acta of church councils.79 The Scripta veterum includes another
short work by a fifth-century pope, the Tractatus de duabus na-
turis in Christo adversus Eutychem et Nestorium of Gelasius I
(492–496), whose pontificate fell during the so-called Acacian
schism between Rome and Constantinople. The Tractatus, an un-
compromising defence of Chalcedon and the Tome of Leo against
monophysitism, was published first in the Antidotum of Johannes
Sichardus and again in Heroldt’s Haeresiologia.80 Simler was not
the first Zurich theologian to make use of the work: it is cited by
Bullinger, in De origine erroris,81 and by Peter Martyr Vermigli,
who challenges Brenz’s use of Gelasius as an authority for the
Lutheran view of the hypostatic union.82

Simler’s collection incorporates two texts of north African pro-
venance: the Libri tres ad Trasimundum Vandalorum regem by
Fulgentius, bishop of Ruspe (468–533); and the Libri quinque con-
tra Eutychetem by Vigilius, bishop of Thapsus (late fifth century).
Fulgentius’s treatise was written around 515, as an apology for the
orthodox faith against the Arian ruler Thrasamund. It was first
published in 1520, together with Fulgentius’s other surviving
works, by Johannes Cochlaeus and Willibald Pirckheimer, and

omnia, Cologne: Johann Birckmann, 1561 (VD 16 L 1202); Cologne: Johann Birck-
mann, 1569 (VD 16 L 1203). – Cf. Simler, Scripta veterum, 81r.

79 Orthodoxographa theologiae sacrosanctae ac syncerioris fidei doctores numero
lxxvi [...], Basel: Heinrich Petri, 1555 (VD 16 H 2550), 654–658; Monumenta s.
patrum orthodoxographa, hoc est theologiae sacrosanctae ac syncerioris fidei doctores,
numero circiter LXXXV […], 3 vols, Basel: Heinrich Petri, 1569 (VD 16 G 3788), vol.
1, 41–45; Concilia omnia, tam generalia, quam particularia, ab apostolorum tempori-
bus in hunc usque diem a sanctissimis patribus celebrata […], 2 vols, Cologne: Peter
Quentel, 1538 (VD 16 C 5643), vol. 1, 347v–349v. The letter to Emperor Leo appears
in Concilia, vol. 1, 388v–392v.

80 Antidotum contra diversas omnium fere seculorum haereses […], Basel: Heinrich
Petri, 1528 (VD 16 S 6283), 230v–237v; Haeresiologia, hoc est, opus veterum tam
Graecorum quam Latinorum theologorum, per quos omnes, quae per catholicam Chris-
ti ecclesiam grassatae sunt, haereses confutantur […], Basel: Heinrich Petri, 1556 (VD
16 H 2544), 683–697. The Sichardus edition is mentioned in Simler, Bibliotheca, 221.

81 See Bergjan, Bullinger, 134, n. 10.
82 Vermigli, Dialogus, 12v–15v. Cf. Mahlmann, Die christologischen Schriften, 20.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

89

again in Heroldt’s Haeresiologia;83 Simler mentions both editions
in his introduction to the text.84 Fulgentius was highly regarded by
the Zurichers because of his emphasis on the impassibility of the
divine nature and apparent support for their contention, against
Brenz, that Christ’s humanity continues to be circumscribed phy-
sically after his glorification; he is cited on these points by Bullin-
ger in the Decades, the Tractatio and the Fundamentum firmum,
and by Vermigli in his Dialogus.85 Vigilius’s Contra Eutychetem
enjoyed similar popularity with Reformed writers. In May 1539,
Gwalther procured a copy of the editio princeps, by Caspar
Churrerius, for Bullinger, who republished it soon afterwards;86
the work was also included in Heroldt’s Haeresiologia.87 The value
that Bullinger attached to Contra Eutychetem, as a patristic wit-
ness against the allegedly monophysite Christologies of Kaspar
Schwenckfeld and the ubiquitarians, is evident from the frequency
with which he refers to it in his own writings. Particularly note-
worthy is his citation in the Decades (4,6) of a lengthy passage
from the work where Vigilius argues against the omnipresence of
Christ’s flesh.88 Besides the editions mentioned above, Simler con-

83 Opera B. Fulgentii Aphri, Episcopi Ruspensis, theologi antiqui. Nuper in vetus-
tissimo codice apud Germanos inventa, obsoletis et Langobardicis literis conscripta.
Antea nunquam impressa […], Hagenau: Thomas Anshelm, 1520 (VD 16 F 3355),
xxxvr-lxviir; Haeresiologia, 48–94. The Cochlaeus-Pirckheimer text was based on a
manuscript from the library of Johannes Trithemius. A second edition appeared in
Cologne in 1526.

84 Simler, Scripta veterum, 139r. See also the entry for Fulgentius in Simler, Biblio-

theca, 211f.

85 HBS 3, 126; Bullinger, Tractatio, 28r–v; Bullinger, Fundamentum firmum, 129v,
138r–v; Vermigli, Dialogus, 37v–38r, 16r–17r. Bullinger’s use of Fulgentius is highligh-
ted by Opitz, Heinrich Bullinger als Theologe, 190.

86 Orthodoxa et erudita D. Ioachimi Vadiani viri clarissimi epistola, qua hanc ex-
plicat quaestionem, an corpus Christi propter coniunctionem cum verbo inseparabilem
alienas a corpore conditiones sibi sumat nostro saeculo perquam utilis et necessaria.
Accesserunt huic D. Vigilii Martyris et Episcopi Tridentini libri v pii et elegantes, Zu-
rich: Christoph Froschauer the Elder, 1539 (HBBibl I 113). This is Bullinger’s only
patristic edition.

87 Haeresiologia, 761–[796].
88 HBS 4, 534f. Cf. Vigilius, Libri quinque contra Eutychetem (PL 62, 95–154)
[Vigil. Thap. c. Eutych.] 4,14. For other examples of Bullinger’s use of Vigilius, see HBS
3, 44, 176f.; De conciliis, 99r–100r; Tractatio, 25v–26r, 28r; Responsio qua ostenditur
sententiam de coelo et dextera Dei, 67v, 71r, 72r, 79v; Ad Testamentum, 26r, 29r–v.
The work is also cited extensively in Vermigli’s »Dialogus«; see 12v, 33r–v, 42r–43v,

90

Mark Taplin

sulted Georg Cassander’s volume of Opera of Vigilius, published
in 1555.89 Like previous editors of Contra Eutychetem, he mista-
kenly assumed its author to be identical with Bishop Vigilius of
Trent (c. 353–405). Ironically, this error may have served to en-
hance the work’s status, by associating it with a well-known mar-
tyr of the church rather than an obscure African cleric.

One of the shorter texts in the Scripta veterum is De duabus
naturis et una persona Christi adversus Eutychen et Nestorium, by
Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius (c. 475–526), the celebrated
Aristotelian commentator and author of De consolatione philo-
sophiae. De duabus naturis, with its influential definition of a per-
son as »an individual substance of rational nature«, was included
in the first edition of Boethius’s collected works, printed in Venice
(1491/92), and in the volume of the same writer’s Opera edited by
Heinrich Loriti (Glarean) and published by Petri in Basel.90 Rough-
ly contemporaneous with Boethius was John Maxentius, the leader
of a delegation of monks from Tomi, in present-day Romania, to
Constantinople and Rome in 519–520. These »Scythian« monks
were advocates of the so-called theopaschite formula, which pro-
claimed that »one of the Trinity was crucified«. Although the for-
mula was initially rejected by Pope Hormisdas, in the course of the
sixth century it became accepted as orthodox.91 The Scripta vete-

68v–69r, 104v–106r. Andreae, by contrast, mocks Vigilius as »Dormilius« (CTB 12, 82
[no. 13]). For Simler’s response, see Scripta veterum, 111r: »mirum igitur est nostra
aetate quondam suo iudicio theologorum coryphaeum, optimum hunc patrem et doc-
tissimum, ignominiose mutato nomine Dormilium appellare: qui dum hac ratione illum
perstringere se putat, suam interim impudentem temeritatem et arrogantiam modestis
hominibus ridendam seu potius miserandam prodit.«

89 B. Vigilii martyris et episcopi Tridentini opera […], Cologne: Arnold Birckmann
the Elder, 1555 (VD 16 V 1184). The work is discussed in Backus, Historical Method,
183–194. See Simler’s comments in Bibliotheca, 678.

90 Both editions are mentioned in Simler, Bibliotheca, 43. For Loriti’s text of »De
duabus naturis«, see Anitii Manlii Severini Boethi in omnibus philosophiae partibus
inter Latinos et Graecos autores principis opera, quae extant omnia […], Basel: Hein-
rich Petri, 1546 (VD 16 B 6402), 948–957. A second Basel edition appeared in 1570
(VD 16 B 6403).

91 John Meyendorff, Imperial Unity and Christian Divisions: the Church 450–680
A.D., New York 1989, 218–220; Aloys Grillmeier, Christ in Christian Tradition. Vo-
lume Two: From the Council of Chalcedon (451) to Gregory the Great (590–604). Part
Two: The Church of Constantinople in the sixth century, trans. John Cawte and Pauline
Allen, London 1995, 320–338.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

91

rum includes several »opuscula« attributed to Maxentius: the Li-
bellus fidei; the Capitula contra Nestorianos et Pelagianos; the
Professio brevissima catholicae fidei; the Brevissima adunationis
ratio verbi Dei, ad propriam carnem; the Responsio ad Acephalos;
the Dialogi duo contra Nestorianos; and the Responsio ad epis-
tolam, quae dicitur esse Papae Hormisdae.92 The same collection
of works had been published several times previously: as an ap-
pendix to the 1520 and 1526 editions of Fulgentius, in Heroldt’s
Orthodoxographa and in Grynaeus’s Monumenta.93

Maxentius’s views are representative of the theological tendency
known as neo-Chalcedonianism, which married acceptance of
Chalcedon with intense reverence for the works of Cyril of Alex-
andria (c. 378–444), from whom the monophysites also drew their
inspiration.94 One of the most sophisticated neo-Chalcedonian
works, Justinian’s Edictum rectae fide,95 is given pride of place in
the Scripta veterum. The edict, which was promulgated in 551,
formed part of Justinian’s campaign to outlaw the Antiochene
Christology associated with the so-called Three Chapters: The-
odore of Mopsuestia, the works of Theodoret of Cyrrhus against
Cyril, and the letter of Ibas of Edessa to Maris the Persian. Prior to
appearing in the Scripta veterum, it had been published in Crab-
be’s edition of conciliar acta.96 The final work in Simler’s antho-
logy, the Disputatio contra Acephalos by Rusticus the Deacon, a
nephew of Pope Vigilius (537–555), dates from the same period
but is the product of a quite different Christological tradition.97

92 Corpus christianorum: Series Latina, Turnhout 1954ff. [CCSL], vol. 85A, 3–153;
ACO1 4.2, 3–62; Patrologiae cursus completus (Series Graeca), ed. Jacques Paul Migne,
162 vols, Paris 1857–1866 [PG], vol. 86(1), 75–113.

93 Opera B. Fulgentii, ir-xxvr (the works of Fulgentius and Maxentius are paginated
separately); Orthodoxographa, 673–720; Monumenta, vol. 1, 47–61; vol. 3,
2028–2063.

94 Patrick T.R. Gray, The Defense of Chalcedon in the East (451–553), Leiden 1979
(Studies in the History of Christian Thought 20); Theologische Realenzyklopädie, ed.
Gerhard Krause and Gerhard Müller, 36 vols, Berlin 1977–2004, vol. 24, 289–296.

95 Drei dogmatische Schriften Justinians, ed. Eduard Schwartz, Milan 21973,
129–169; PG 86(1), 993–1035; English translation in: On the Person of Christ: The
Christology of Emperor Justinian, ed. Kenneth P. Wesche, New York 1991, 163–198.
The work is discussed in Gray, Defense of Chalcedon, 154–164; Grillmeier, Church of
Constantinople, 425–438.

96 Concilia omnia, vol. 1, dlxxiv-dlxxviir.
97 PL 67, 1167–1254. On this work, see Uwe Michael Lang, Christological Themes

92

Mark Taplin

Like other western churchmen, Rusticus opposed the condemna-
tion of the Three Chapters at the Second Council of Constanti-
nople (553), in which his uncle had acquiesced under pressure
from Justinian. His Disputatio had appeared previously in both
Sichardus’s Antidotum and the Haeresiologia.98

Although Simler was the first to assemble these works in a single
volume, many of them had featured in earlier patristic anthologies,
as we have seen. It would appear that, together, they had begun to
be regarded by the Reformed as constituting a »canon« of texts in
which the Christological teaching of the ancient church was con-
veniently summarised. In the preface to his Vigilius edition, Bullin-
ger commends the Tome, Gelasius’s Tractatus, Fulgentius’s Ad
Trasimundum and the Dialogi duo of Maxentius as works in
which the heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches are conclusively re-
futed, while Vigilius, Rusticus and Leo are among the writers cited
in Simler’s Responsio ad Stancari librum.99 In reality, of course, the
texts published in the Scripta veterum represent a variety of Chris-
tological perspectives. Whereas works such as Leo’s epistles and
Rusticus’s Disputatio exemplify the strongly dyophysite approach
of the western church, derived ultimately from Augustine, Justi-
nian’s edict and the works of Maxentius are in the Alexandrian,
anti-Nestorian tradition of Cyril. One of the principal challenges
that Simler faced was to fashion from this diverse material a uni-
fied consensus patrum supportive of his own theological position.

2.2 Sources

In the Annotationes that accompany his chosen texts and, more
particularly, in the Narratio, which supplies the wider historical
context within which they are set, Simler has recourse to a variety
of sources. The work on which he draws most heavily is the Bre-
viarium causae Nestorianorum et Eutychianorum by Liberatus of

in Rusticus Diaconus’ »Contra Acephalos Disputatio«, in: Studia Patristica 38 (2001),
429–434.

98 Antidota, 246r–274v; Haeresiologia, 707–761. See the entry in Simler, Biblio-

theca, 615.

99 Heinrich Bullinger Briefwechsel, ed. Ulrich Gäbler et al., Zurich 1973ff. [HBBW],

vol. 9, 167f. (no. 1283); Simler, Responsio ad Stancari librum, 5v, 11r, 20v, 44r.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

93

Carthage, written shortly after the death of Pope Vigilius in June
555. Liberatus, while rejecting Nestorianism, shared the reluctance
of other western writers to condemn the wider Antiochene school
from which it was derived; like Rusticus, he was strongly critical of
the anathematisation of the Three Chapters. The Breviarium sup-
plies the basic framework for Simler’s history between the out-
break of the Nestorian controversy (428) and Constantinople II.
Large sections of the work – for example, Liberatus’s description
of the mission of Paul of Emesa to Alexandria, which ended the
schism between Cyril and the oriental bishops following the Coun-
cil of Ephesus, and his account of the affair of Ibas of Edessa in the
late 440s – are absorbed into the Narratio more or less verbatim.100
Simler’s other major source, complementing Liberatus’s western
perspective, is the works of the Greek ecclesiastical historians (Eu-
sebius, Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen and Evagrius), which were
available in Wolfgang Musculus’s Latin edition (1549).101 For the
period with which Simler is concerned, by far the most important
of these writers was Evagrius, although the Ecclesiastical History
of Socrates, which terminates in 439, includes material relevant to
the Nestorian controversy. Evagrius’s work, written in the late
590s, opens with the election of Nestorius as bishop of Constan-
tinople and concludes in 593/94, following the death of Bishop
Gregory of Antioch. As an adviser to Gregory, Evagrius had pri-
vileged access to the diocesan archives of Antioch, which included
copies of the acta of the ecumenical councils and other synods.102
Important documents such as the Encyclical and Counter-Ency-
clical of Basiliscus (475–476), Zeno’s Henotikon (482) and the
religious edict of Justin II (571) are reproduced in his history in
their entirety, while a substantial epitome of the acta of Chalcedon
is appended to book 2. A moderate Chalcedonian himself, Evag-

100 Simler, Scripta veterum, 176v, 179v. Cf. Liberatus of Carthage, Breviarium cau-
sae Nestorianorum et Eutychianorum (ACO1 2.5, 98–141; PL, 68, 969–1050) [Liberat.]
8,10.

101 The volume was reprinted in 1554, 1557 and 1562. For details, see Wallraff,
Kirchengeschichtswerke, 231f., 258. The Greek text of the histories had been published
previously by Robert Estienne. Musculus’s work incorporated his own translations of
Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen and Evagrius, together with Joachim Camerarius’s earlier
translation of Theodoret.

102 Pauline Allen, Evagrius Scholasticus the church historian, Louvain 1981, 6.

94

Mark Taplin

rius also consulted rival monophysite works, along with various
secular histories and chronicles.103

Evagrius was a key source for the unfinished Ecclesiastical His-
tory of Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopoulus (fourteenth century), a
Latin translation of which was published by Johann Lange in
1553.104 Like other sixteenth-century church historians, including
the authors of the Magdeburg Centuries, Simler makes extensive
use of this late text in conjunction with Evagrius. Despite the lar-
gely derivative character of Nicephorus’s history, it provided Sim-
ler with some important information omitted by Evagrius – for
example, on the career of Peter the Fuller, a fifth-century mono-
physite bishop of Antioch, which Evagrius was inclined to gloss
over for patriotic reasons.105 The Narratio’s categorisation of the
various monophysite splinter groups that emerged during the sixth
century is based on Nicephorus’s account, which was itself taken
from the Thesaurus orthodoxae fidei of Nicetas Choniates.106 Sim-
ler also makes use of two earlier Byzantine works, the Compen-
dium historiarum of George Cedrenus (eleventh century) and the
Epitome historiarum of John Zonaras (early twelfth century), bi-
lingual editions of which had been published in Basel.107 They are
especially important for his treatment of the monothelete contro-
versy, as Nicephorus’s history terminates in 610, shortly before its
outbreak.

103 The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius Scholasticus, trans. Michael Whitby, Li-

verpool 2000, xxii-xxxi.

104 Nicephori Callisti Xanthopuli, scriptoris vere Catholici, Ecclesiasticae historiae
libri decem et octo […], Basel: Johannes Oporin, 1553 (VD 16 N 1436). See the refe-
rence in Simler, Bibliotheca, 513. Excerpts from the history had been published by
Beatus Rhenanus in 1535. Lange’s translation was based on a Viennese manuscript
formerly held in the library of Matthias Corvinus; see Günter Gentz, Die Kirchenge-
schichte des Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopulus und ihre Quellen: Nachgelassene Un-
tersuchungen, Berlin 21966, 3, 207; Wallraff, Kirchengeschichtswerke, 224f., n. 10.
Further editions appeared in Basel in 1555, 1560 and 1561.

105 Simler, Scripta veterum, 197v–198r; Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopoulus, Histo-
ria ecclesiastica (PG 145, 549–1333; 146; 147, 9–448) [Niceph. h.e.] 15,28. See the
comments of Allen, Evagrius, 123, and Whitby, Ecclesiastical History, 137, n. 15.

106 Gentz, Nicephorus, 179–181.
107 Georgii Cedreni Annales […] Guilielmo Xylandro Augustano interprete, Basel:
Johannes Oporin, Nikolaus Episcopius the Younger and Eusebius Episcopius, 1566 (VD
16 G 1351); Ioannis Zonarae Monachi […] compendium Historiarum […], Basel: Jo-
hannes Oporin, 1557 (VD 16 J 811).

Josias Simler and the Fathers

95

Besides these second-hand accounts, Simler had at his disposal
some key primary documents, the acta of the early church coun-
cils. The first collection of acta, by Jacques Merlin (Paris 1524),
was quickly superseded by Peter Crabbe’s impressive Cologne edi-
tion, published by Quentel in 1538. This formed the basis for two
subsequent revisions, by Crabbe (1551) and Laurentius Surius
(1567) respectively.108 It is likely that Simler used the original
Crabbe edition, as this is the only one mentioned in his Bibliotheca
of 1574.109 The collection included Liberatus’s Breviarium, toge-
ther with material from the ecumenical councils of Chalcedon
(451), Constantinople II (553) and Constantinople III (680–681),
and from two important regional councils, the synods of Constan-
tinople (536) and the Lateran (649). Simler alludes to conciliar
material on a number of occasions in the Narratio – for example,
to support his view of monotheletism as merely a modified form of
Eutychianism, rather than a synthesis of orthodox and anti-Chal-
cedonian Christologies.110 Generally, however, his accounts of con-
ciliar proceedings are rather terse, conveying little of the drama
and immediacy of the stenographic records. The most colourful
incident to which he refers – the condemnation of the monothelete
monk Polychronius at Constantinople III, after failing to deliver on
his claim to be able to revive the dead – has an obvious polemical
function, furnishing evidence of the innate deceitfulness of here-
tics.111

Simler also draws heavily on the writings of Cyril. The Narratio
includes references to the Alexandrian’s correspondence with Nes-
torius, Pope Celestine and others, and to the synodical letters of
the Council of Ephesus, which were appended to the standard La-
tin edition of Cyril’s works.112 When discussing the Twelve Ana-

108 James V. Mehl, The First Printed Editions of the History of Church Councils, in:
Annuarium Historiae Conciliorum 18 (1986), 128–143; Benjamin De Troeyer, Bio-
Bibliographia Franciscana Neerlandica Saeculi XVI, 2 vols, Nieuwkoop 1969, vol. 1,
163–167; vol. 2, 63–68.

109 Simler, Bibliotheca, 556.
110 Simler, Scripta veterum, 208r.
111 Simler, Scripta veterum, 206v. Cf. Acta conciliorum oecumenicorum, series se-

cunda, ed. Rudolf Riedinger et al., Berlin 1984ff. [ACO2], vol. 2.2, 675–683.

112 Operum divi Cyrilli Alexandrini episcopi tomi quatuor, quorum postremus nunc
recens accedit, ex graecis manuscriptis exemplaribus fideliter latinitate donatus, 4 vols,

96

Mark Taplin

thematisms, a key Cyrilline text whose orthodoxy was much con-
tested during the Nestorian controversy, Simler quotes extensively
from Cyril’s apologies Against the Orientals and Against The-
odoret.113 For the subsequent dispute with Eutyches, he has recour-
se to the correspondence of Pope Leo, especially Leo’s letters to
Emperors Theodosius II and Leo I and to Theodosius’s sister Pul-
cheria.

Some of the texts published in the main body of the Scripta
veterum are utilised again in the Narratio, as sources for the te-
achings of Nestorius (Vigilius, Cassian), later Nestorianism (Ma-
xentius) and Eutyches (Leo, Vigilius). Other patristic works cited
include Proclus’s Tome to the Armenians, Augustine’s De haere-
sibus, Basil’s Contra Eunomium, the dialogues of Ps. Athanasius,
Theodoret’s Eranistes and John Damascene’s De haeresibus (the
last two in relation to Eutychianism). Simler also makes occasional
use of the Corpus iuris civilis for imperial anti-heresy legislation. In
the short biography that he appends to Cassian’s De incarnatione,
he cites the ecclesiastical histories of Sozomen and Rufinus, Pro-
sper of Aquitaine’s De gratia dei et libero arbitrio, the Institutiones
of Cassiodorus, De viris illustribus by Gennadius of Marseille, the
Chronicon of Ado of Vienne, the Chronicon sive Chronographia
of Sigebert of Gembloux, and Raffaele Maffei’s Commentariorum
urbanorum libri XXXVIII; elsewhere there are references to the
Liber pontificalis, the Suda, the Libri historiarum of Gregory of
Tours, the Historia Romana of Paul the Deacon and John Bale’s
Illustrium maioris Britanniae scriptorium catalogus. The Magde-
burg Centuries is cited infrequently but, given the tendency of six-
teenth-century writers to acknowledge works by their contempo-
raries only to a limited extent, Simler may well have drawn on it
more heavily than is apparent at first glance.

Basel: Johannes Herwagen the Elder, 1546 (VD 16 C 6568), vol. 4, 1–89, 276–297. The
full contents of the edition are listed in Simler, Bibliotheca, 153.

113 Simler, Scripta veterum, 179v–186v. For these works, see Operum divi Cyrilli,

vol. 4, 142–219.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

97

2.3 Interpretation

Despite its polemical motivation, the Scripta veterum is a work of
serious scholarship, in the traditions of upper Rhine humanism.
Two texts, Justinian’s Edictum and Vigilius’s Contra Eutychetem,
are presented in improved redactions, based on manuscripts that
Simler had procured from the brothers Pierre and Franc¸ois Pi-
thou.114 Variant readings and emendations to earlier editions are
listed in the Annotationes, which, in the case of Justinian’s work,
also highlight textual parallels with the canons of Constantinople
II and Justin II’s religious edict of 571.115 Like Liberatus and the
Greek church historians, Simler incorporates into his account the
full text of important documents such as the Chalcedonian Defi-
nition, the Henotikon of Zeno, and the conciliar decree of Con-
stantinople III, as well as a previously unpublished anti-monothe-
lete confession translated into Latin by »a certain friend of ours«
(»amicus quidam noster«).116 He also takes care to correct com-
mon errors such as the designation of the Constantinople synod of
536 as the Fifth Ecumenical Council and Crabbe’s placing of the
Lateran synod of 649 in the reign of Constantine III, rather than
his heretical son Constans II.117 Although the Scripta veterum con-
tains nothing comparable to the Magdeburg Centuriators’ attack
on previous ecclesiastical historiography,118 Simler’s generally re-

114 Simler, Scripta veterum, 8v, 112r. Simler received the Vigilius manuscript from
Franc¸ois Pithou in August 1570 (ZB Ms. F 60, 572, 585). The following month, his
correspondent promised to send a copy of Justinian’s edict »quod ex veteribus mem-
branis descripsi« (ZB Ms. F 60, 573). On 23 March 1571, Simler wrote to thank Pithou
for these texts, announcing his intention to publish them with »quaedam alia Latino-
rum scripta de duabus in Christo naturis, una cum annotationibus« (ZB Ms. F 46, 360).
On the Pithou brothers, see Donald R. Kelley, Foundations of Modern Historical Scho-
larship: Language, Law and History in the French Renaissance, New York 1970,
241–270.

115 On the use of annotations as a critical tool by early modern editors, see John F.
D’Amico, Theory and Practice in Renaissance Textual Criticism: Beatus Rhenanus Bet-
ween Conjecture and History, Berkeley, CA 1988, 21.

116 Simler, Scripta veterum, 195r–196r, 199r–v, 205v–206r, 208v. Simler attributes
the confession to Anastasius of Antioch (sixth century), whom elsewhere he confuses
with Anastasius the Sinaite (seventh-eighth centuries) (Simler, Scripta veterum, 205r).
117 Simler, Scripta veterum, 203r, 205r. In De conciliis (fo. 106r), Bullinger appears
to conflate the synod of 536 with Constantinople II, but Bibliander correctly distingu-
ishes between the two. See Bibliander, De summa trinitate, 38.

98

Mark Taplin

spectful attitude to tradition does not preclude him from ackno-
wledging discrepancies in his sources, weighing up the merits of
rival accounts and, where necessary, rejecting the judgments of
previous writers. For example, he is unconvinced by Evagrius’s
claim that the contrasting theological positions of Justinian and his
wife Theodora were part of a pragmatic strategy for managing
religious tensions within the empire, preferring to regard their dif-
ferences as genuine.119 When Nicephorus suggests Arian or Euno-
mian influences as the source for the doctrine that Christ is igno-
rant of some things according to his human nature – an error
associated with the monophysite group known as the Agnoetae –
Simler is again sceptical, noting with characteristic doctrinal pre-
cision that the Arians denied the omniscience not of Christ’s hu-
manity but of the divine Word himself. The report is further dis-
credited for him by Nicephorus’s confusion of the sect’s purported
founder, an Alexandrian deacon called Themistius, with the pagan
philosopher of the same name.120

118 Ecclesiastica historia, integram ecclesiae Christi ideam, quantum ad locum, pro-
pagationem, persecutionem, tranquillitatem, doctrinam, haereses, ceremonias, guber-
nationem, schismata, synodos, personas, miracula, martyria, religiones extra ecclesiam
et statum imperii politicum attinet, secundum singulas centurias perspicuo ordine com-
plectens, Basel: Johannes Oporin, 1559–1574 (VD 16 E 218–232, 234–238), vol. 1,
α4v–α5r; Die Anfänge der reformatorischen Geschichtsschreibung: Melanchthon, Slei-
dan, Flacius und die Magdeburger Zenturien, ed. Heinz Scheible, Gütersloh 1966,
59–61. See the comments of Enrico Norelli, The Authority attributed to the Early
Church in the Centuries of Magdeburg and the Ecclesiastical Annals of Caesar Baro-
nius, in: The Reception of the Church Fathers in the West: From the Carolingians to the
Maurists, ed. Irena Backus, 2 vols, Leiden 1997, vol. 2, 745–774 (748).

119 Simler, Scripta veterum, 8r. Cf. The Ecclesiastical History of Evagrius, with the
Scholia, ed. Joseph Bidez and Le´on Parmentier, London 1898; PG 86, 2415–2885
[Evag. h.e.] 4,10.

120 Simler, Scripta veterum, 207v–208r: »Caeterum quod Agnoetas ignorantiam qua-
rundam rerum humanae in Christo naturae tribuisse ait, in eo ipsorum sententiam non
videtur recte assecutus, cum Ariani a quibus haec Monophysitae acceperunt ipsi Verbo
ignorantiam tribuerint, et ipsi Monophysitae non potuerunt humanae naturae Christi
ignorantiam tribuere qui unam tantum in Christo naturam agnoscebant, eamque Dei
Verbi incarnatam. Et certe si sic tantum uti scribit docuissent hoc nomine non essent
reprehendendi. Porro cur Themistium philosophum huius sectae defensorem faciat, non
video, cum ille homo gentilis fuerit, qui proculdubio de eo non quaesivit quid nosset aut
ignoraret Christus. Liberatus sectae huius auctorem facit Themistium Alexandrinae ec-
clesiae diaconum, cuius mentio fit in Romana et Constantinopolitana VI Synodo contra
Monothelitas.« Cf. Niceph. h.e. 18,50; Liberat. 19.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

99

the end of

In the Annotationes, Simler testifies to his interest in contem-
porary debates on the dating and authenticity of patristic works by
rehearsing and, at times, challenging the accepted wisdom on these
questions. Thus he rejects the suggestion by Giulio Marziano Rota
of an early date for Boethius’s De duabus naturis, arguing on the
basis of internal textual evidence that it is more likely to have been
written towards
the pontificate of Symmachus
(498–514) or during that of Hormisdas (514–523).121 On this oc-
casion, modern scholarship is in agreement with Simler,122 but of-
ten the Annotationes betray the extent to which he is influenced by
confessional bias. In his comments on the Edictum, for instance, he
rejects Justinian’s correspondence with Pope John II, with which
the work had been linked by Crabbe, as spurious on doctrinal
grounds.123 Simler’s summary dismissal of this material may be
contrasted with his defence of the by-now traditional attribution of
Contra Eutychetem to Vigilius of Trent, despite the difficulty of
crediting the latter – who, as he himself acknowledges, is reported
to have lived during the reigns of Arcadius and Honorius
(395–408/423) – with authorship of a text that clearly postdates
Chalcedon.124 The question is of more than academic importance:
Simler’s conservative conclusion allows him to stress the particular
relevance to his Rhaetian readers of Contra Eutychetem, as the
work of a writer from an adjacent region.125

The theological imperative that drives Simler’s work is frequent-
ly in tension with the humanist scholarly ideals to which he pro-
fesses to adhere. Like Bullinger, Simler does not regard the Fathers
as beyond reproach. Maxentius is described as writing in a defec-
tive style, although his opinions are termed excellent.126 The same
criticism is directed at Cassian, whom Simler also chides for setting

121 Simler, Scripta veterum, 15v. For Rota’s position, see Boethi in omnibus philo-

sophiae partibus opera, a5r.

122 Boethius: The Theological Tractates, ed. Hugh Fraser Stewart and Edward Ken-

nard Rand, London 1918 (The Loeb Classical Library 74) [LCL 74], 72f.

123 Simler, Scripta veterum, 8v. On this point, Simler is following Bibliander; see

Bibliander, De summa trinitate, 113–130.

124 Simler, Scripta veterum, 111v. Cf. Cassander’s treatment of the issue in Vigilii

opera, [+*7r]–[+*8r].

125 Simler, Scripta veterum, *2v.
126 Simler, Scripta veterum, 71v.

100

Mark Taplin

too much store by »monastic study, human traditions and mon-
kish exercises«,127 and for relying on a faulty Latin translation of
scripture, which leads him to misinterpret Mal 3,8 (Vulgate: »Si
affiget homo Deum, quia vos affigitis me?«) as a prophecy of
Christ’s crucifixion.128 But Simler takes care to ensure that the Fat-
hers’ occasional lapses are not allowed to detract from their au-
thority; errors such as Cassian’s, he adds quickly, may be put
down to the ancients’ zeal in defence of the true faith and igno-
rance of Hebrew, and are therefore forgiveable.129 Similarly, he
excuses the paucity of citations from the Bible and earlier Fathers
in the Disputatio contra Acephalos on the grounds that Rusticus
was dealing with opponents »who buried the simplicity and purity
of Christian teaching beneath sharp and complex disputations,
and, when they could not defend their opinions from scripture,
took refuge in the authority of human reason«. He even makes a
virtue of Rusticus’s »scholastic« approach, by stressing its relevan-
ce to current Christological disputes, in which many of the same
abstruse arguments are rehearsed.130

On specific doctrinal issues, Simler is anxious to iron out any
apparent discrepancies between patristic and Reformed teaching.

127 Simler, Scripta veterum, 46v: »Interea tamen satis apparet eum nimio monastices
studio, humanis traditionibus et monachorum exercitiis plus quam oportet tribuisse,
atque adeo cordis puritatem et vitam aeternam horum meritis adscripsisse.«

128 Simler, Scripta veterum, 48v. Cf. John Cassian, De incarnatione Domini contra
Nestorium libri VII (CSEL 17, 233–391; PL, 50, 9–272) [Cassian. c. Nest.] 2,3. Simler
points out that the original Hebrew verb, ybq, denotes robbery, not crucifixion, and
refers the reader to Zec 12,10, which can be applied with more confidence to Christ’s
sufferings.

129 Simler, Scripta veterum, 48v: »condonandum autem hoc est veteribus, qui studio
defendendae verae religionis testimonia congerentes saepe ea magis numerarunt quam
ponderarunt, et in his nonnunquam ignorantia Hebreae linguae aberrarunt.«

130 Simler, Scripta veterum, 168r–v: »Porro quod ad rerum ipsarum tractationem
spectat ea diversa est a superioris seculi scriptoribus, illi enim tantummodo testimoniis
sacrae scripturae et veterum patrum adversus haereticos pugnant: at in hoc libro pau-
cissima scripturarum testimonia proferuntur, patrum vero non nulla, plurimum autem
rationibus acute excogitis disceptatur. Caeterum hoc non Rustico nostro vitio verti
debet, sed potius Acephalis, qui simplicitatem et puritatem Christianae doctrinae, acutis
et perplexis disputationibus obruerunt, et quum scripturis sua tueri non possent, ad
haec humanae rationis praesidia confugerunt. Laudanda autem est diligentia Rustici
nostri qui eorum argumenta studiose observavit, et collegit, et eadem erudite ac solide
confutavit. Multa etiam quae nostra aetate disceptatur circa unionem personalem, non
inerudite in hoc dialogo explicantur.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

101

This concern manifests itself with particular force in his remarks
on Cassian, whose alleged semi-Pelagianism had made him suspect
in the eyes of some Protestants.131 Simler is aware that Cassian was
attacked by Prosper for his stance on the relationship between
grace and works, and that other authorities urge caution when
reading what he has to say on the subject. However, he insists that
such criticisms are restricted to the monastic Collationes and, wit-
hin that work, to the discussion of free will. No orthodox writer
has raised objections to De incarnatione, which expounds pure
doctrine, supported by testimonies from scripture and the Fathers,
and responds to the novel and unbiblical teachings of Nestorius
with »solid and clear« arguments.132 From the work’s explicit con-
demnation of Pelagius, it can reasonably be deduced that by the
time of its composition Cassian had returned to a sound under-
standing of grace. Even in the Collationes, where he seems more
sympathetic to the Pelagians, he does not sanction »all of their
impious and crass opinions concerning the powers of the human
will«;133 the most that Simler will concede is that Cassian appears
to attach too much importance to free will in one passage of De
incarnatione, which he duly notes.134 Beza, who otherwise welco-
med the publication of the Scripta veterum, felt that Simler had
been too lenient in his treatment of Cassian and should have done

131 See, for example, Ecclesiastica historia, vol. 5, 1332: »Doctrinam de libero arbi-

trio corrupit, et Pelagii sententiam amplexus est, ac propagavit.«

132 Simler, Scripta veterum, 47v: »Repraehenduntur autem non omnia illius scripta,
sed Collationum libri, et in his duntaxat disputatio de libero arbitrio: caeterum libri de
Sanctissimo et ineffabili mysterio dominicae incarnationis, a nullo unquam orthodo-
xorum repraehensi sunt, puram enim in his doctrinam de Incarnatione proponit, et eam
scripturarum plurimis testimoniis, et Patrum quoque authoritate diligenter et accurate
confirmat: ac Nestorii doctrinam novam et scripturis sanctis dissentaneam esse ostendit,
eiusque rationes solide et perspicue confutat.«

133 Simler, Scripta veterum, 47v: »Damnat etiam his libris [De incarnatione] nomi-
natim et graviter Pelagianam haeresim, et Leporium sua opera ad fidem catholicam a
Pelagianismo conversum esse ostendit, quod tamen alii Augustino, alii Germano Antis-
siodorensi tribuunt: cum autem hi libri ab ipso in extrema senecta scripti sint, verisimile
sit eum forte Augustini et aliorum scriptis edoctum resipuisse, et sese prorsus a Pela-
gianis seiunxisse, ad quos in collationibus inclinare videbatur, quanquam ne in his
quidem omnes earum impias et crassas opiniones de humani arbitrii viribus approbet.«

134 Simler, Scripta veterum, 49v. Cf. Cassian. c. Nest. 5,4.

102

Mark Taplin

more to highlight the latter’s shortcomings as an exegete, to pre-
serve his readers from similar errors.135

Simler’s interpretation of the texts collated in the Scripta vete-
rum is shaped, above all, by the notion of the consensus patrum.136
Although he acknowledges some variability in the patristic tradi-
tion, and the superiority of some writers to others on particular
points,137 for the most part he depicts the Fathers as speaking with
one voice. Simler’s approach, like that of most other sixteenth-
century patristic scholars, is fundamentally unhistorical: the works
in his anthology are presented as witnesses to timeless doctrinal
truths, rather than as products of localised and evolving theologi-
cal traditions. One of the functions of the Annotationes is to sus-
tain this impression of continuity, by reconciling any seemingly
aberrant statements by the Fathers with the settled Christological
formulas of a later period. For example, when Fulgentius speaks of
the Word assuming a man, instead of using the preferred term »a
human nature«, by this he means »not a separately subsisting hy-
postasis of a man but a nature of human flesh and soul taken up by
the Word«. Simler notes that the same language is to be found in
other ancient writers, »especially those who lived before Nestori-
us«, the obvious implication being that it has become suspect only
because of its subsequent misuse by the heresiarch.138 Although he
is slightly embarrassed by one passage in Cassian’s De incarnati-
one that appears to anticipate Eutyches (and Schwenckfeld) by
preaching the transformation of Christ’s flesh into a »spiritual sub-
stance«, he is sure that it can interpreted on orthodox lines, as

135 Beza to Simler, 19 September 1571 (CTB 12, 186 [no. 861]).
136 On the importance of this concept for the Reformed, see Irene Dingel, Das Stre-
ben nach einem »consensus orthodoxus« mit den Vätern in der Abendmahlsdiskussion
des späten 16. Jahrhunderts’, in: Steinmetz, Patristik, 181–204.

137 See, for example, Simler, Scripta veterum, 71v: »Argumentum Nestorianum quod
hic [John Maxentius, Dialogi duo contra Nestorianos (CCSL 85A, 49–110; ACO1 4.2,
14–44; PG 86(1), 115–158) 1,3] tractatur, Mariam non geniusse Deum, quia quod
nascitur eiusdem substantiae sit cum eo ex quo nascitur, tractatur etiam a Cassiano lib.
7 cap. 2 sed paulo aliter: is enim negat propositionem hanc, nativitas debet esse ho-
moousios parienti: mihi videtur accuratius haec quaestio tractari a Maxentio.«

138 Simler, Scripta veterum, 139v: »Fulgentius noster saepe hominem susceptum dicit
libro tertio: nomine hoc non separatim subsistentem hominis hypostasim intelligens, sed
naturam humanae carnis atque animae a verbo susceptam. Usi sunt multi veterum hac
phrasi, praesertim qui ante Nestorium vixere.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

103

referring to the assumption of a human nature by the Word. Si-
milarly, when Cassian attributes one power and substance to
Christ, it is necessary to understand substantia as a synonym for
persona, rather than natura, »as elsewhere among the ancients«, if
Cassian is to be harmonised with other writers of the time and
saved from condemnation by Chalcedon, Constantinople II and
Constantinople III – for Simler, an unthinkable conclusion.139 The
idea of a doctrinally uniform patristic corpus, set in clear and un-
equivocal opposition to those designated as heretics in ecclesiasti-
cal tradition, is carried over from the Annotationes into the Nar-
ratio, where it underpins Simler’s account of the Nestorian and
monophysite schisms.

3. The »Narratio« I: the Nestorian controversy

3.1 Overview

The Narratio is prefaced by a brief account of the heresies that
afflicted the church during the first four centuries of its existence.
Simler assigns these early dissidents to several distinct camps. The
first group, represented by Carpocrates, Cerinthus and »Ebion«,140
was made up of those who denied both Christ’s divinity and the
virgin birth. A second faction – the two Theodoti, Paul of Samo-

139 Simler, Scripta veterum, 49r–v: »Porro quod dicit naturam carnis in spiritualem
translatam esse substantiam non de natura carnis abolita intelligendum est, aut eius
proprietatibus sublatis, sed de assumptione carnis a Verbo, illam enim abolitionem et
Chalcedonia synodus et veteres omnes quibus Cassianus consentit aperte damnant. Sic
cum nomen humanitatis negat esse in Christo non aufert illi substantiam carnis nostrae,
cum aperte dicat veram Incarnationem confitendam contra Martionem: sed ut ita ex-
plicat sese, infirmitatem omnem corpoream absumptam docet in persona Christi, itaque
cum gloria coelesti exornata sit caro Christi, eam in illo praecipue respiciendam. Cum
autem unam virtutem et unam substantiam Christo tribuit, nisi hoc dicamus non de
natura accipiendum, sed substantiae nomen pro personae nomine positum esse, ut alibi
apud veteres, non poterimus Cassianum conciliare cum aliis sui temporis scriptoribus,
et a damnatione Chalcedoniae quintae et sextae synodi eximere.« Cf. Cassian. c. Nest.
3,3.

140 Tertullian (De praescriptione haereticorum [CCSL 1, 187–224; PL, 2, 9–74] 33),
supported by Jerome, Epiphanius and others, identifies Ebion as the eponymous foun-
der of the Jewish-Christian sect known as the Ebionites, which probably derived its
name from the Hebrew for »poor« (ñuiba).

104

Mark Taplin

sata and Photinus – accepted the doctrine of the virgin birth, while
continuing to reject Jesus’s godhead. The third group comprised
the Docetists and Gnostics such as Basilides, Valentinus, Cerdon,
Marcian and Mani, who denied the true humanity of Christ.
Fourth, there were the Patripassians Praxeas, Victorinus, Sabellius
and Noetus, who erased the personal distinction between the Fat-
her and the Son within the Godhead. They were followed by Arius,
who transformed Christ into a »created god«, and finally, by Ari-
anism’s later offshoots, the Homoiousians, Anomoeans and Ma-
cedonians. Under the orthodox Emperor Theodosius I (379–395),
peace was at last restored to the church, but the protracted Arian
controversy had already prepared the ground for further dissensi-
on. This manifested itself as the heresies of Pelagius in the west and
Nestorius and Eutyches in the east, where numerous monophysite
factions arose to plague the empire in the centuries preceding the
rise of Islam.141

Having thus set the scene, Simler turns his attention to the first
of the major fifth-century Christological heresies, Nestorianism.
Chapter 1 describes Nestorius’s appointment as bishop of Con-
stantinople and the opening phase of the Nestorian controversy,
the catalyst for which was the refusal of Nestorius and his fellow-
Syrian Anastasius to recognise the Virgin as theotokos (»God-
bearer«). Chapter 2 charts the escalating conflict between Nesto-
rius and Cyril of Alexandria, from their initial exchange of letters
through to Nestorius’s condemnation at the Council of Ephesus
(22 June 431), prior to the arrival of the Syrian delegation led by
John of Antioch. In chapter 3, Simler describes John’s hostile re-
action to the council’s decision, his establishment of a rival »con-
ciliabulum« of eastern bishops, which anathematised Cyril, and
the eventual resolution of the schism between Antioch and Alex-
andria in the so-called Formula of Reunion (433). Chapter 4 gives
an account of Nestorius’s miserable death in exile and examines
the continuing tensions between supporters and opponents of Cy-
ril, especially in Syria. Simler concludes his discussion of Nestori-
anism with three doctrinal chapters: an exposition of Cyril’s Twel-
ve Anathematisms, which he views as pivotal to the controversy;

141 Simler, Scripta veterum, 169r–v.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

105

an analysis of Nestorius’s teachings, set against the true doctrine of
the incarnation preached by Cyril and other Fathers; and a chapter
on the alleged revival of Nestorianism in his own day.

3.2 Nestorius

Nestorianism was something of a raw nerve for the Zurichers,
who, from Zwingli’s time onwards, had been charged by their
Lutheran opponents with breathing new life into this ancient er-
ror.142 In De conciliis and his works against Brenz, Bullinger rejec-
ted any suggestion of a link between the Zurich church and Nes-
torius, whom he condemned in the strongest possible terms. The
antistes contrasted Nestorius’s teaching that the Word is present in
the man Christ by »partnership […] or association« (»assistentiam
[…] seu societatem«) with the orthodox doctrine of the hypostatic
union. Nestorianism, he argued, amounts to a denial of Christ’s
true divinity, as it erases the distinction between Christ and other
holy men in whom God’s presence was manifested.143 Bullinger’s
view of Nestorius as an adoptionist, in the tradition of Paul of
Samosata and Photinus, was shared by most other Reformed wri-
ters. Beza, for example, describes Nestorius as emerging from the
same »pit of hell« as Arius to deprive the incarnate Christ of his
divinity and replace the man-God with a divinised man.144

In the Narratio, Simler provides a much more detailed and mul-
tifaceted account of Nestorianism, which nonetheless serves to re-
inforce the traditional characterisation of Nestorius as a »Samo-
satenian«. Following the Greek church historians, he denounces
Nestorius as a »frivolous, arrogant and vainglorious man« (»homo
[…] levis et arrogans vanae gloriae appetens«) – a populist prea-
cher who curried favour with the multitude by feigning an ascetic
lifestyle.145 However, he is concerned less about the heresiarch’s

142 For examples, see Bergjan, Bullinger, 144, n. 47.
143 Bullinger, De conciliis, 96v; Responsio, 58r–v.
144 CTB 8, 236.
145 Simler, Scripta veterum, 170r: »Cum autem illi munus docendi populum com-
missum fuisset, mox ostendit qualis postea tota vita futurus esset, neque enim secutus
est generosum dicendi genus, quo homines ad salutem utiliter erudire posset, sed omnia
sua ad populi delectationem direxit, inanes plausus captando: neque dicendo tantum,
sed vita et habitu ad fictam sanctimoniam composito, ingens sui desiderium et admi-

106

Mark Taplin

personal shortcomings than about the damaging effects of his doc-
trine. Simler is aware that the ancients differ in their assessment of
Nestorius’s heresy. Despite his anti-monophysite orientation, Li-
beratus takes a strongly negative view of Nestorius, whom he con-
demns as a follower of Paul of Samosata; this judgment is suppor-
ted by Cassian, who traces Nestorius’s error back to the Ebionites.
Socrates and Vigilius, by contrast, reject the labelling of Nestorius
as an adoptionist, preferring to attribute his errors to ignorance of
the Fathers.146 Simler does not dismiss this alternative view out of
hand. As an authority on antitrinitarianism, he knows that the
teachings of Nestorius, who confessed the Trinity and recognised
the distinct personality of the Logos, cannot simply be conflated
with the adoptionist monarchianism of Paul of Samosata, and he is
even aware of a statement by Nestorius condemning Paul. Instead,
he proposes a more subtle connection between the two heresies:
namely, that they both tend towards the same end, abolition of
»the true knowledge of our Saviour Jesus Christ«. Although Nes-
torius may not have meant to cast doubt on Christ’s divinity, that
was clearly Satan’s intention in allowing his error to take root.147

rationem apud vulgus excitare studebat, indutus veste fusca, tristis incedens, strepitus
forenses declinans, corporis pallore ut continens videretur aucupans, libris domi ut
plurimum intendens, et in ocio et quiete secum versans et habitans. Hoc habitu, et hac
simulatione multos inescans, magnam aetatis suae partem peregit, ut Christianus vide-
atur magis quam ut esset persequens, et Christi gloriae suam praeferens.« Cf. Socrates,
Historia ecclesiastica, ed. Günther Christian Hansen, Berlin, 1995; PG 67, 30–842
[Socr. h.e.] 7,29; Niceph. h.e. 14,31.

146 Simler, Scripta veterum, 170v–171r. Cf. Liberat. 2–4; Cassian. c. Nest. 1,2; Socr.

h.e. 7,32; Vigil. Thap. c. Eutych. 5,18.

147 Simler, Scripta veterum, 171r: »Utrique [Socrates and Vigilius] in eo quod inter
Samosateni et Nestorii doctrinam distinguit libenter assentior: Photinus enim et Sa-
mosatenus cum Sabellio ut naturam Deitatis ita personam quoque unam professi sunt,
et negarunt verbum seu filium Dei ab aeterno suam habuisse subsistentiam et personam,
Christum quidem ex virgine natum, filium Deum propter conceptum e sacro spiritu
fatebantur, sed in eo non nisi humanam naturam agnoscebant, eumque parem caeteris
hominibus, tantum amplitudine donorum et gratiae illis antecellere: ab his ergo Nes-
torius in eo differt quod Trinitatem cum orthodoxis confitetur, et λοÂ γον agnoscit
υë ϕισταÂ μενον : sed si reliqua eius dogmata spectemus prorsus in eundem finem cum
Samosateno tendunt, qui si non ipsi Nestorio, Satanae tamen proculdubio in his hae-
resibus spargendis fuit propositus, ut aboleatur vera agnitio Servatoris nostri Iesu Chris-
ti.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

107

The initial focus of the dispute between Nestorius and Cyril was
the term theotokos, long established in popular piety as a honorific
for the Virgin but rejected by Nestorius, who proposed christoto-
kos in its stead. Yet Simler insists that it would be wrong to dismiss
the controversy as merely a »quarrel about words«. The fact that
Nestorius was not received back into the church even after drop-
ping his opposition to the theotokos title shows that far more im-
portant issues were at stake: whether Jesus Christ is truly God, or
whether the Word is united to him only by association; how Christ
is to be worshipped and invoked in prayer; in what way he acts as
our high priest and mediator; and how we were saved by his pas-
sion and death.148 Although in his surviving writings Nestorius
appears to affirm that Christ is God and man in one person, it is
clear that he postulated the existence of two individuals (»alius et
alius«, rather than »aliud et aliud«) in Christ: the divine Word, and
the man Jesus, in whom the Word dwells »as in a temple« (»tan-
quam templo«).149 In Nestorius’s theology, there is no »special
union of the Word with the flesh« (»peculiarem unionem Verbi
cum carne«); Jesus is not the true God but »a God-bearing man«
(»Deiferum hominem«), resembling the prophets. He is termed
God and the Son of God only by association with the Word, just as
Moses was designated God to Pharaoh, and his worship is com-
parable to the honour paid to a statue of the emperor, on account
of the one whom it represents.150 Nestorius’s total rejection of

148 Simler, Scripta veterum, 171r: »Neque enim tantum λογομαχι Âα fuit de nomine
Dei genitricis, an beata virgo dici debeat Deipara, aut potius Christipara, quamvis haec
fuerit occasion, et forte initio (ut dixi) non tam rebus quam verbis inter se dissenserint,
controversia fuit de maximis rebus et mysteriis ad salutem nostram pertinentibus, an
Iesus Christus conceptus ex spiritu sancto et natus ex virgine sit Deus, an vero Deus
Verbum tantum per assistentiam et societatem illi adsit, ut Prophetis et Apostolis, an
sint duo filii Deus Verbum et Iesus ex virgine natus: an sit adoratione una adorandus, et
quomodo sit invocandus: Quomodo sit pontifex et mediator noster: quomodo passione
et morte sua nos redemerit.«

149 Simler, Scripta veterum, 171r, 186v. To support this claim, Simler quotes exten-
sively from the collection of statements from Nestorius’s sermons submitted to the
Council of Ephesus by Cyril (ibid., 172v–173r). On these excerpts, see Friedrich Loofs,
Nestoriana: Die Fragmente des Nestorius, Halle 1905, 8. They were published in
Crabbe’s edition of conciliar »acta« (Concilia omnia, tam generalia, quam particularia,
ccccxliiir-ccccxlivv; see Loofs, Nestoriana, 13) and in the Basel Latin edition of Cyril’s
works (Operum divi Cyrilli, 4, 298–303).
150 Simler, Scripta veterum, 186v–187r.

108

Mark Taplin

»theopaschite« language and the communicatio idiomatum con-
firms his departure from orthodoxy. If he had acknowledged the
existence of a single subject in Christ truly, rather than »in words«,
he would have had no difficulty accepting that birth, suffering and
death can be predicated of the Word, by virtue of his assumption
of a human nature.151 Instead, he reduced Christ’s humanity to the
status of a »garment« (»vestimentum«) donned by the second per-
son of the Trinity.152

3.3 Theodore of Mopsuestia

Simler’s harsh verdict on Nestorius may be contrasted with his
treatment of the wider Antiochene theological tradition, which he
was anxious to reclaim for orthodoxy. Whereas Nestorius is jud-
ged (and found wanting) against the exacting Christological stan-
dards established at Chalcedon and subsequent ecumenical coun-
cils, his predecessor Theodore of Mopsuestia (c. 350–428) is dealt
with in a much more lenient fashion. Many ancient writers de-
nounced Theodore as »Nestorius’s teacher«; in this connection,
Simler points to the comments of Maxentius and Justinian and,
especially, to the acta of Constantinople II, which cite Cyril, Pro-
clus and Hesychius of Jerusalem in opposition to the Cilician bish-

151 Simler, Scripta veterum, 171v–172r: »Cum tamen scripturae doceant filium Dei
Deum Verbum natum passum et mortuum carne, non quod divinitas ex homine na-
scatur, patiatur aut moriatur, sed quod haec persona quae ex virgine nata, et passa, et
mortua est; Iesus inquam Nazarenus, non sit homo merus, sed verus et natura Deus, cui
non ita est associata divinitas ut sanctis hominibus qui templum Dei sunt, sed Deus
Verbum ita carnem assumpsit, ut sit unum individuum Verbum et caro: sustentante
Verbo carnem, ut absque Verbo unita nunquam fuerit, aut futura sit caro haec: itaque et
quae Verbi et quae carnis sunt, de hoc individuo dicuntur, Christus enim est unus et
idem Deus et homo, Dei filius et hominis filius: aeternus, et definito tempore Bethlehemi
natus: attamen scripturae docent nos ea quae ita praedicantur discernere, ut naturae
cuique tribuamus quod suum est, quamvis in concreto id personae tribuatur: Christus
natus est ex semine David: haec persona cum sit Deus recte dicitur Deum natum esse ex
semine David secundum carnem. Nestorius vero iudicans idem esse dicere Deum et
natum et mortuum, et divinitatem natam et mortuam, has locutiones repudiavit, et
tribuit carni haec quae secundum carnem de Christo dicuntur, non in una persona
naturas et actiones earum distinguens, sed prorsus naturas separans et cuique suam
separatim tribuens hypostasim, eas rursus nomine et dignitate coniungebat, et ita quam-
vis videri nollet duos Christos et filios faciebat.«

152 Simler, Scripta veterum, 187r.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

109

op.153 However, the issue of Theodore’s orthodoxy is rendered
more problematic by the many contrasting testimonies (in Theo-
doret’s Ecclesiastical History, in Liberatus and in the correspon-
dence of John Chrysostom and Gregory of Nazianzus) to The-
odore’s wisdom and piety, and by the fact that his orthodoxy was
upheld at Chalcedon.154 Simler accepts that, if Theodore wrote the
things attributed to him at Constantinople II, his theology is right-
ly to be condemned, but he is prepared to give credence to Libe-
ratus’s report that statements in Theodore’s works were »exagge-
rated« either by monophysites seeking to discredit him or by Nes-
torians who wished to enlist him among their supporters.155 In the
end, Simler delivers a mixed verdict on Theodore, as »a man of
great learning and wisdom who was at fault here and there in his
writings and sowed the seeds for Nestorianism«. In combating the
errors of those who failed to recognise the distinction of natures in
Christ, Theodore »separated [the two natures], or at least ap-
peared to separate them and to preach two Christs instead of one«;
his status is comparable to that of another orthodox writer, Di-
onysius of Alexandria (third century), whose pointed formulations
against Sabellianism subsequently helped pave the way for Arius.156
Simler rejects the labelling of Theodore as a sectarian because,
unlike Nestorius, he did not defend his errors obstinately and sho-
wed a genuine willingness to accept correction. Although Simler
shies away from repudiating the Fifth Ecumenical Council’s con-

153 Simler, Scripta veterum, 171r–v.
154 Simler, Scripta veterum, 9v, 171v.
155 Simler, Scripta veterum, 9v.
156 Simler, Scripta veterum, 171v: »Quod si mihi licet meas coniecturas in medium
proferre, iudico Theodorum hunc excellenti doctrina et sapientia virum fuisse, eum
tamen alicubi in scriptis suis aberasse et semina Nestorianae doctrinae sparsisse, liben-
ter Patribus quintae synodi credo: de hoc autem eius errore idem iudico quod Basilius de
Dionysio Alexandrino cuius scripta, seminarium Arianismi quidam fuisse censebant […]
Ex his igitur laudibus quas illi tribuunt qui eodem cum ipso tempore vixerunt, iudico
virum bonum fuisse, ideoque non destinata animi malitia hos errores sparsisse: sed
nimio studio contradicendi Apollinari et aliis qui veritatem humanae naturae non in-
tegram in Christo servabant, et unam duntaxat in eo naturam agnoscebant, dum na-
turas in Christo distinguendas esse urget, easdem quoque separavit, vel saltem separare
visus est, et duos Christos pro uno praedicare.« In the Polish trinitarian controversy, the
example of Dionysius was used by Simler and other Zurich divines to show how over-
zealous defence of one aspect of true doctrine can itself give rise to heresy. See Taplin,
Italian Reformers, 196f.

110

Mark Taplin

demnation of Theodore, he is clearly ill at ease with it. In the
Annotationes on Justinian’s Edictum, which defends the practice
of anathematising individuals after their deaths, he observes that
this opinion was not universal among Justinian’s contemporaries
and commends the Council of Nicaea on condemning not Arius
himself, but only his teachings.157 While acknowledging Theodo-
re’s flaws, Simler goes to considerable lengths to retain him within
the ranks of the Fathers, partly out of a genuine irenicism that he is
keen to see imitated in his own day, and partly because he wishes
to minimise the points of difference between the Antiochene Chris-
tology represented by Theodore and the rival Alexandrian school
of Cyril. Theodore’s errors come to be seen not as evidence of
heresy, but as unfortunate by-products of his eagerness to defend
dyophysite orthodoxy. A comparison may be drawn between
Simler’s judgment on Theodore, who was condemned posthu-
mously on the basis of statements that did not reflect the full range
of his thought, and his subsequent comments regarding Cyril,
whose Christology he sees as likewise prone to manipulation by
both opponents and supporters.

3.4 Theodoret, Cyril and the »consensus patrum«

To some extent, Simler’s generous assessment of Theodore repres-
ents a departure from the Zurich church’s previous line; in De
conciliis, Bullinger endorses the received view of the bishop of
Mopsuestia as a Nestorian with adoptionist views.158 However, in
the same work he commends other Antiochene churchmen – Aca-
cius of Beroea, Paul of Emesa and even Ibas of Edessa, whose letter
to Maris was proscribed at Constantinople II – for their »piety and
learning« (»pietate et doctrina«).159 The most influential Antio-
chene theologian of the fifth century, Theodoret of Cyrrhus (393-c.
460), was held in particularly high regard by the Zurichers on

157 Simler, Scripta veterum, 10r. Cf. Joachim Camerarius, Chronologia secundum
Graecorum rationem temporibus expositis, autore Nicephoro archiepiscopo Constan-
tinopolis […] Addita est Narratio […] de Synodo Nicaena, nunc denuo edita[ …], Basel:
Johannes Oporin, 1561 (VD 16 N 1446), 106.

158 Bullinger, De conciliis, 105v–106r.
159 Bullinger, De conciliis, 97v.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

111

account of his strong dyophysitism. Bullinger owned a copy of the
1549 Basel edition of Theodoret’s Eranistes, which he cites in the
Decades against ubiquitarianism and on the proper understanding
of the communicatio idiomatum;160 the Reformed protagonist in
Vermigli’s Dialogus, Orothetes, also refers repeatedly to the same
work.161 Against Brenz and other Lutherans, who tended to be
suspicious of Theodoret, the Zurichers emphasised the value of his
works.162 Simler praises Theodoret for his »piety, learning and elo-
quence«, describing him as well versed in scripture and the Fat-
hers, and unsurpassed among the Greeks as a heresiologist.163 In
the Responsio ad Stancari librum, he vigorously defends Theodo-
ret against his detractors, pointing out that he both refuted Nes-
torianism in his works and anathematised Nestorius personally at
Chalcedon, where he was restored to the see of which he had been
unjustly deprived at the Second Council of Ephesus.164

The fact that this defence was necessary is indicative of The-
odoret’s precarious status within the patristic canon. As Simler was
aware, Theodoret had been prominent within the opposition to
Cyril at Ephesus and had penned a refutation of the Twelve Ana-
thematisms, which had been condemned as heretical at Constan-
tinople II. In defending Theodoret, he had no wish to cast asper-
sions on Cyril, traditionally regarded as the champion of the or-
thodox faith against Nestorianism; on the contrary, the Narratio
forms part of a wider Reformed campaign to recapture Cyril from
Lutheran writers such as Brenz and Martin Chemnitz, who regar-
ded him as the chief patristic authority for their view of Christ.
Simler’s task was to account for the schism between Cyril’s Alex-

160 Leu/Weidmann, Heinrich Bullingers Privatbibliothek, 154; HBS 4, 527f., 537f.
161 Vermigli, Dialogus, 5r–v, 8r–9r, 32r, 36v–7r, 40r, 41r–v.
162 See Bullinger, Fundamentum firmum, 80r–83v. For the contrasting Lutheran
view, see Mahlmann, Die christologischen Schriften, 392, 434–446, and Brandy, Brenz,
140.

163 Simler, Scripta veterum, 176r: »scripta illius ostendunt, vir fuit magnus pietate,
doctrina, eloquentia, ut merito in Theologia et rebus sacris inter primos locum obtineat:
quando vix alius est, e Graecis praesertim Theologis, qui rationibus et scripturarum
testimoniis fortius haereticos impugnet et prosternat: nullus vero illo totius antiquitatis
cognitione instructior, et qui sua omnia tot Patrum et veteris ecclesiae testimoniis con-
firmet, id quod legenti dialogos ipsius adversus Eutychianos [the »Eranistes«], et Hae-
reticorum fabularum compendium, aliaque eius scripta manifestum est.«

164 Simler, Responsio ad Stancari librum, 39v.

112

Mark Taplin

andrian faction, and Theodoret and his fellow orientals, in a way
that allowed him to vindicate the orthodoxy of both sides and, in
so doing, to preserve intact the notion of a consensus patrum on
Christological issues.

In his works dealing with the subject, Bullinger puts the quarrel
between Cyril and the Antiochenes down to a misunderstanding –
Theodoret’s belief that, in the Twelve Anathematisms, Cyril was
seeking to blur the boundaries between the two natures of
Christ.165 Because the dispute related to words, not substance, it
was quickly resolved once Cyril had had the opportunity to ex-
plain the difference between his assertion that God suffered »in the
flesh« and the views of the fourth-century heretic Apollinaris of
Laodicea, who made Christ’s divinity the direct subject of the pas-
sion. Bullinger portrays the Ephesian schism as little more than a
temporary local difficulty; Theodoret and Cyril are said to have
been at odds for only »for a short time«, with Cyril’s clarification
of his teaching effecting a full and lasting reconciliation between
them.166 Due to his more extensive knowledge of the sources, Sim-
ler is unable to dismiss the conflict quite so easily. In the Narratio,
he acknowledges that the church was split for three years and
chronicles in detail the mutual anathemas and political manoeuv-
rings of the rival parties both at Ephesus and following the council,
as they strove to win imperial backing for their position.167 Ulti-
mately, however, his explanation of the causes of the schism is
identical to Bullinger’s. Simler accepts that the controversy centred
on doctrinal issues, rather than just the question of Nestorius’s
dismissal, but he maintains that personal animosity between those
involved clouded their judgment, making it impossible for them to
deal fairly with their opponents.168 This led the Syrian bishops to
charge Cyril with Apollinarianism and Arianism, only to be ac-
cused in turn of preaching two Christs. Simler sees in the heated

165 Bullinger, De conciliis, 98r; Bergjan, Bullinger, 152–154.
166 Bullinger, Fundamentum firmum, 81v.
167 Simler, Scripta veterum, 175v. Cf. Liberat. 6; Niceph. h.e. 14,35.
168 Simler, Scripta veterum, 175v–176r: »Ac tum quantum iudico scriptis illis certa-
tum est, quorum aliqua hodie quoque extant: etenim non tantum inter eos controversia
fuit de depositione Nestorii, sed de ipsis quoque dogmatibus disceptarunt: quamvis
animorum alienatio et offensae aliunde ortae posterioris controversiae causae fuisse
videantur, quod minus dextre exacerbatis animis invicem sua dicta interpretarentur.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

113

exchanges between the two factions an example of the Fathers’
tendency to allow their emotions to get the better of them; his
praise for Cyril, in particular, is tempered by a recognition of the
Alexandrian’s personal flaws, evidenced by his involvement earlier
in his career in unsavoury episodes such as the murder of the Pla-
tonic philosopher Hypatia.169 But while deploring the polemical
tone of the controversy, Simler finds reasons to justify the stances
adopted by both sides, on the basis of their respective theological
concerns. The robust, even provocative, way in which Cyril asserts
the unity of Christ’s person is understandable, given that he was
opposing the grave errors of Nestorius. By the same token, Theo-
doret and the other eastern bishops can be excused for taking of-
fence at some of the more »exaggerated« formulations in the Twel-
ve Anathematisms, as »they were not yet clear about Cyril’s me-
aning« and feared – rightly – that his phraseology was susceptible
to abuse by followers of Apollinaris, who were well represented in
Syria.170

In chapter 5 of the Narratio, Simler argues that the specific cri-
ticisms directed against the Anathematisms stemmed from a mis-
reading of Cyril; essentially, he argues, Theodoret and his collea-
gues were tilting at windmills, attributing to the Alexandrian views
that he did not in fact hold. For example, they understood the
statement in Cyril’s first anathematism that the Word was »born
or made in the flesh« to be equivalent to saying, with Apollinaris,
that the Word was »converted« into flesh, yet Cyril explicitly rules

169 Simler, Scripta veterum, 176r–v: »Ut autem libere quod sentiam in medium pro-
feram, humani aliquid in hac causa boni illi Patres passi sunt, et affectibus aliquatenus
superati sunt, ac arbitror mihi assensuros omnes qui paulo attentius totam huius schis-
matis historiam expenderint: et ea quoque consideraverint quae de Cyrillo memoriae
mandata sunt ab ecclesiasticae historiae scriptoribus, de eius ad episcopatum electione,
et rebus adversus Iudaeos, Orestem urbis praefectum, et Hypatiam philosopham gestis.
Sed cum plurima ipsius Cyrilli et Theodoreti scripta extent, docta et laboriosa, et certe
ecclesiae admodum utilia, multum nos illis debere ingenue confitendum est, de actis
tamen eorum et de hoc dissidio, homines eos nobis iudicare liceat«. Cf. Camerarius,
Chronologia, 144.

170 Simler, Scripta veterum, 176r: »Quia enim illi certamen erat cum Nestorio dis-
cerpente naturas, vehementior forte fuit in quibusdam locutionibus exaggerandis: quare
non mirum est Theodoretum, cum aliis plurimis qui mentem Cyrilli nondum perspec-
tam habebant, his offensum fuisse.« Cf. HBBW 11, 266f. (no. 1550); Vermigli, Dialo-
gus, 34r–36r.

114

Mark Taplin

out this interpretation.171 Theodoret’s opposition to the term hy-
postatic union (εÏνωσις καϑ’υë ποÂ στασιν), which Cyril uses to de-
scribe the bond between Christ’s divinity and humanity, is also
misconceived: for Theodoret, the term signifies »something mixed
or composite«, but Cyril’s intention is merely to underline the clo-
seness of the union between the Word and the human nature that
he has assumed, »without any conversion and confusion«, in the
incarnation.172 Similarly, when in his third anathematism Cyril
speaks of a »natural union« (εÏνωσις καταÁ ϕυÂ σιν) between the
Word and flesh in Christ, he means only that they constitute a
»true« union, like the union of body and soul in man, in which
each nature retains its distinct qualities, as opposed to the affective
or associational union proposed by Nestorius.173 The orientals are
right to stress the importance of distinguishing between scriptural
passages that apply to Christ’s divinity and others that relate to his
human nature – failure to do so properly could open the door to
Arianism – but this »dispensatio« is not questioned by Cyril, as
they maintain. Cyril’s aim is merely to make clear that all such
»voces« relate to the single person of the incarnate Word; once
again, the difference between the two sides vanishes on closer scru-
tiny.174 Cyril is also at one with Theodoret on the question of

171 Simler, Scripta veterum, 180r: »Theodoreto respondit eum frustra laborare in eo
probando Verbum esse immutabile ideoque non conversum in carnem, quoniam non
asserat mutationem verbi, neque hoc pugnare cum suo Anathematismo, debuisse eum si
vellet impugnare suum anathematismo aperte negare Emanuelem esse verum Deum, et
sanctam Virginem esse Dei genitricem.« Cf. Cyril of Alexandria, Apologeticus contra
Theodoretum pro duodecim capitibus (PG 76, 385–452) [Cyr. apol. Thdt.] c. 394–398.
172 Simler, Scripta veterum, 180v: »Porro Theodoreto nomen Unionis secundum sub-
sistentiam improbatur tanquam novum, et extraneum a scripturis divinis, et patribus
qui has interpretati sunt. Deinde videtur temperaturam aut misturam quondam signi-
ficare, quam sequitur confusio quae naturarum proprietates abolet. Verum Cyrillus
respondet se nomine unionis καϑ’υποÂ στασιν usum ad destruendam haeresim Nestorii
nativitatem Verbi secundum carnem negantis, ac nihil aliud hoc nomine significare vo-
luisse, quam Verbi naturam, hoc est subsistentiam, quae est ipsum Verbum, humanae
naturae vere unitum esse citra ullam conversionem et confusionem, ut unus intelligatur
et sit Christus, idem Deus et homo.« Cf. Cyr. apol. Thdt. c. 399–402.

173 Simler, Scripta veterum, 181r–v: »Cum autem naturale idem hic sit quod vere,
nulla statuitur confusio, sed duarum dissimilium rerum Deitatis et humanitatis vera
unio, in unum Christum.« Cf. Cyril of Alexandria, Apologeticus pro duodecim capiti-
bus adversus orientales episcopos (PG 76, 315–386) [Cyr. apol. orient.] c. 327–332;
Cyr. apol. Thdt. c. 403–410. See also Simler, Scripta veterum, 187v.

174 Simler, Scripta veterum, 182r: »Quod autem adversarii Cyrillo sua verba obiiciunt

Josias Simler and the Fathers

115

God’s impassibility. His »theopaschitism«, as expressed in the
twelfth anathematism, differs profoundly from that of later mo-
nophysites, for Cyril makes clear that the Word suffered »in the
flesh«, rather than in his divinity, and that the passion is attributed
to him »by dispensational appropriation«.175 In the same way, the
superficial similarities between Theodoret’s language – for exam-
ple, his use of the term theophoros for Jesus – and that of Nesto-
rius mask his underlying agreement with Cyril on the issue of
Christ’s unity. Whereas Nestorius proposes a twofold worship of
Christ, first as God and secondly as his visible image in the man
Jesus, both Cyril and Theodoret teach that Christ is to be adored
singly, as the one incarnate Word.176

In modern patristic scholarship, it is usual to assign Cyril and
Theodoret to distinct and, in some respects, opposing Christolo-
gical traditions: the »schools« of Alexandria and Antioch. Both
Theodoret and Nestorius were products of the Antiochene school,
which originally posited »two subjects« in Christ; although Theo-
doret modified his terminology after Ephesus to bring it more into
line with Cyril’s language, it has recently been argued that he re-
mained a crypto-Nestorian until the end of his life.177 Similarly,
Cyril owed more to Apollinaris – including the concept of »natu-
ral« union and the formula »one incarnate nature of God the
Word« (μι Âα ϕυÂ σις τουÄ ϑεουÄ λοÂ γου σεσαρκωμε Âνη) – than he cared
to admit.178 For Simler, however, there is no Alexandrian or Anti-
ochene tradition, only the time-honoured orthodoxy of the church

quasi sibi contradicat, his ipsis confirmant anathematismum, nam illis affirmat sum-
mam unionem servandam, quod ipsi quoque dicunt, unio autem summa non admittit
dualitatem aut sectionem: quod autem addit secundum unitarum naturarum virtutem
uni filio accommodanda quae dicuntur, et quod adversarii dicunt unamquamque vocem
de Christo dictam exponendam esse, recte dictum est, et anathematismo non repugnat.«
Cf. Cyr. apol. orient. c. 331–342.

175 Simler, Scripta veterum, 186r: »Quando igitur Verbum dicitur carne pati, non
ipsum in propria natura intelligitur pati, sed quia proprium eius est sanctum corpus,
ideo eius dicuntur carnis passiones secundum dispensativam appropriationem.« Cf.
Cyr. apol. orient. c. 379–382.

176 Simler, Scripta veterum, 183v–184r.
177 Paul B. Clayton, The Christology of Theodoret of Cyrus: Antiochene Christology
from the Council of Ephesus (431) to the Council of Chalcedon (451), Oxford 2007,
285.

178 Istva´n Pa´sztori-Kupan´ , Theodoret of Cyrus, Abingdon 2006, 10; John N.D. Kel-

ly, Early Christian Doctrines, London 51977, 319.

116

Mark Taplin

and heretical divergences from it. The Fathers may use different
terms – conversio, coniunctio, commixtio or compositio – to de-
scribe the ability of God’s substance to assume an extraneous na-
ture without itself being altered, but all relate to the same pro-
cess.179 The quarrel between Alexandria and Antioch was a dispute
about terminology, not substance, aggravated by personal rival-
ries. Once the channels of communication between Cyril and John
of Antioch had been reopened, their schism was swiftly brought to
an end, for it became apparent to both patriarchs that, fundamen-
tally, they professed the same faith.180 As their reconciliation sho-
wed, the true dividing line ran not between Antioch and Alexan-
dria, but between the orthodox, both Syrian and Egyptian, and
Nestorius, who asserted the unity of Christ’s person »in words«
but denied its reality.

In fact, the Formula of Reunion was successful only in papering
over the cracks between the Cyrilline and Antiochene factions in
the eastern church, which remained at loggerheads throughout the
430s and 440s.181 In the Narratio, however, this conflict is subtly
reconfigured as a struggle between the orthodox mainstream and
certain »quarrelsome and restless men« who, dismayed by the res-
toration of ecclesiastical concord, strove once again to divide the
episcopate.182 Following his agreement with John, Cyril was criti-
cised in some quarters for conceding too much to the Antiochenes,
while Nestorius’s allies began to circulate forged letters from pro-

179 Simler, Scripta veterum, 187v. Simler attributes most apparent disagreements bet-
ween the Fathers to differences in their use of technical vocabulary. He illustrates the
point with reference to the term »substantia«, which in Latin writers may denote either
υë ποÂ στασις (as in Boethius) or ουÆ σιÂα. See ibid., 16r: »Duo autem ex his nominibus cum
non eodem modo ab omnibus accipiantur hypostasis et substantia, factum est ut saepe
inter se dissentire videantur qui re ipsa consentiunt. Boetho enim et multis aliis Indivi-
duum tantum substantia nominatur, ideo illae sunt tres in Deo substantiae: aliis sub-
stantia est ουÆ σιÂα et hi unam in Deo substantiam profitentur, et tres subsistantias, ita
enim hypostases interpretantur«. Cf. Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius, De duabus
naturis et una persona Christi adversus Eutychen et Nestorium (PL 64, 1337–54; LCL
74, 72–129) [Boeth. c. Eutych.] 2–3.

180 Simler, Scripta veterum, 176v–177r.
181 R.V. Sellers, The Council of Chalcedon: A Historical and Doctrinal Survey, Lon-

don 1953, 20–56.

182 Simler, Scripta veterum, 178r: »Omnino autem homines turbulenti et inquieti
quibus dolebat pacem in ecclesia factum esse, hoc sategabant ut episcopi denuo inter se
committerentur.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

117

minent churchmen demanding his rehabilitation. But Cyril did not
resile from the doctrinal consensus that had been reached; instead,
in letters to Acacius of Melitene and Eulogius, presbyter of Con-
stantinople, he endorsed the dyophysite language favoured by the
eastern bishops.183 Simler is careful to downplay Cyril’s role in the
campaign by Acacius and another Syrian bishop, Rabbula of Edes-
sa, to suppress the works of Theodore of Mopsuestia and Diodore
of Tarsus, which were being disseminated and translated by fol-
lowers of Nestorius in order to give his innovations a veneer of
respectability; instead, he portrays the triumvirate of Cyril, John of
Antioch and Proclus of Constantinople as forming a united front
against both Nestorians and the extreme wing of Cyril’s own par-
ty. Proclus’s Tome, which denounced propositions drawn anony-
mously from the works of Theodore, is described as a work against
Nestorianism, rather than against Theodore per se; Simler notes
that the Tome was endorsed by John of Antioch, who continued
vocally to defend Theodore, and that Proclus resisted attempts to
induce him to condemn Theodore openly. Following Liberatus, he
also casts doubt on the authenticity of the three books that Cyril is
said to have written against Theodore and Diodore of Tarsus.184
Although Cyril’s letters provide clear evidence of both his con-
tempt for Theodore’s theology and the continuing strains in his
relationship with Theodoret, who remained unwilling to anathe-
matise Nestorius, none of this is reflected in the Narratio. Instead,
Simler emphasises the unity of the orthodox episcopate, using his
history to undergird the notion of the consensus patrum. The coll-
apse of the Ephesian settlement at the end of the 440s is attributed
not to its inherent instability or to the still unresolved divisions
between Antioch and Alexandria, but to the appearance of a new
heresy, based on a distorted reading of Cyril’s works.

183 Simler, Scripta veterum, 178r. On this »concession«, see McGuckin, Cyril 227f.
184 Simler, Scripta veterum, 178v. Cf. Liberat. 10.

118

Mark Taplin

4. The »Narratio« II: monophysitism, monotheletism

and the origins of Islam

4.1 Overview

Whereas the first half of the Narratio concentrates on events wit-
hin a relatively short time span and is dominated by a few out-
standing personalities (Cyril, Nestorius, Theodoret, John of Anti-
och), the remainder of the work is much more diffuse. Chapters 8
and 9 deal with the Eutychian controversy proper: the dispute bet-
ween Eutyches and Bishop Flavian of Constantinople; Eutyches’
condemnation by the »Home Synod« in 448; the Second Council
of Ephesus (August 449), which exonerated Eutyches and deposed
Flavian, Theodoret, Domnus of Antioch and Ibas of Edessa; and
the ultimate triumph of orthodoxy at the Council of Chalcedon,
which anathematised Eutyches and his ally Dioscorus of Alexan-
dria, rehabilitated the Antiochenes and established a cast-iron, ex-
plicitly dyophysite Christological standard against which all sub-
sequent doctrine was to be measured. The following three chapters
discuss the state of the church, now bitterly divided between sup-
porters and opponents of Chalcedon, under the Emperors Marcian
(450–457) and Leo I (457–474), Zeno (474–491) and Basiliscus
(475–476), and Anastasius I (491–518). Next Simler considers the
reigns of Justin I (518–527) and Justinian I (527–565), which saw
the entrenchment of the Chalcedonian settlement in its refined,
neo-Chalcedonian form at Constantinople II. Finally, he traces the
development of the principal seventh-century heresy, monothele-
tism, from its emergence under the Emperor Heraclius (610–641)
through to its condemnation at Constantinople III. The Narratio
concludes with two further thematic chapters – on the monophy-
site sects of antiquity, and on incidences of Eutychianism in more
recent times.

4.2 Eutyches, Dioscorus and the Second Council of Ephesus

Simler’s account of the Eutychian controversy follows a similar
pattern to his history of the dispute with Nestorius. Although Eu-
tyches’ Christology was in some senses the polar opposite of Nes-

Josias Simler and the Fathers

119

torianism, Simler regards the similarities between Nestorius and
Eutyches as more significant than their differences. Both displayed
arrogance and a lack of learning, »which make many men espe-
cially bold and audacious«.185 Each had powerful political backers
– Count Candidianus, the imperial commissioner at Ephesus, and
the eunuch Chrysaphius respectively – and was opposed in the first
instance by Eusebius, bishop of Dorylaeum.186 Above all, their her-
esies were born out of the same fundamental error: the failure to
distinguish properly between the concepts of »person« and »na-
ture« as they relate to Christ. Nestorius’s two-nature, two-person
Christology may seem far removed from the monophysitism of
Eutyches, but both positions are predicated on the mistaken as-
sumption that there must be an equal number of natures (physeis)
and hypostases in Christ.187

Just as Nestorius’s errors were opposed by Cyril, so the inno-
vations of Eutyches were resisted by a subsequent generation of
orthodox churchmen, led by Flavian of Constantinople and Pope
Leo. However, the situation was complicated by the intervention
of Dioscorus, Cyril’s successor as bishop of Alexandria, who saw
in Eutyches’ case an opportunity to rid the church of Antiochene
influence once and for all. Eutyches and Dioscorus sought to por-
tray themselves as the theological heirs of Cyril, but Simler charges
them with imposing a monophysite interpretation on Cyril’s
words, »even though Cyril himself never took that view«.188 In-

185 Simler, Scripta veterum, 171v: »Causae autem erroris [Nestorii] huic fuerunt, ut
constat ex his quae expositae sunt, ambitio, studium contendendi, seu ingens quaedam
ϕιλονεικιÂα, et postremo ignorantia, quae plerunque homines temerarios et audaces
facit«. Eutyches is described as a »monachus imperitus et imprudens« (ibid., 192r).

186 Simler, Scripta veterum, 172v, 192v. Cf. Liberat. 11; Evag. h.e. 1,9; Niceph. h.e.

14,32,47.

187 Simler, Scripta veterum, 192r: »Error eius ex eodem quo Nestorii fonte prolabi-
tur, ut Boetius asserit, nam sicut Nestorius cum arbitraretur numerum naturarum et
personarum sibi mutuo respondere, et unamquanque naturam suam habere hypostasim,
ac videret duas esse in Christo naturas, duplicem quoque credidit esse personam: sic
Eutyches cum eadem sentiret, parem esse naturarum et personarum numerum, in as-
sumptione huius rationis a Nestorio dissensit, et quia videbat unum Christum unamque
eius personam in scripturis proponi, et idem etiam nuper publica concilii Ephesii sen-
tentia confirmatum esse, unam tantum in Christo naturam esse asseruit.« Cf. Boeth. c.
Eutych. 5.

188 Simler, Scripta veterum, 179v: »mox post Cyrilli obitum Eutyches et Dioscorus
contrariam Nestorianae haeresim confinxere, et se, male tamen, Cyrilli auctoritate de-

120

Mark Taplin

deed, when Eutyches appealed to Cyril and Athanasius in support
of his opinions, Flavian was able to quote back to him passages
from Cyril in which the existence of two natures in Christ was
clearly affirmed. Eutyches’ errors have their origin not with Cyril
but, as Flavian suggests, with Apollinaris and the Gnostic Valen-
tinus, who denied that Christ was truly human.189

Having failed to match the sound theological argumentation of
their orthodox opponents, the Eutychians fell back on violence and
fraud in an effort to impose their views on the church. Simler
describes how, in the run-up to Ephesus II, Chrysaphius and Di-
oscorus together conspired to block prominent eastern bishops
such as Theodoret and Ibas from attending. At the council itself,
Dioscorus muzzled the representatives of Pope Leo (who withdrew
in protest), refused to allow the testimony of Eusebius of Dorylae-
um to be heard, and prevented proper investigation of Eutyches’
views. Supported by imperial troops and vast numbers of monks,
Dioscorus was able to intimidate dissenting bishops into signing a
blank piece of paper, on which the »decisions« of the synod were
subsequently inscribed. Where necessary, Dioscorus was prepared
to use physical force to silence his opponents; on the basis of re-
ports in Evagrius and Nicephorus, Simler attributes Flavian’s death
three days after the council to injuries sustained at the hands of
Dioscorus and his acolytes.190 It is instructive to compare Simler’s
narrative of events at Ephesus II, which presents Dioscorus as ac-
ting in flagrant contravention of all canonical standards, with his
treatment of the First Council of Ephesus. Although Cyril, like
Dioscorus, made strategic use of the mob to secure the compliance
of his fellow-bishops, there is no hint of this in the Narratio. The
legitimacy of Cyril’s decision to open the council in the absence of
the Syrian bishops was questionable, to say the least, but Simler
defends it on the grounds that John of Antioch had instructed Cyril
to proceed if his arrival was delayed. Whereas modern scholars are

fendere conati sunt, ea quae ab illo bene dicta erant depravantes. Ut non omnino inanis
fuerit Orientalium metus, qui verebantur ne his anathematismis statueretur naturarum
Christi confusio, et divinitati passibilitas tribueretur: quamvis enim Cyrillus ipse ne-
quaquam sic senserit, alii tamen postea eius verbis hunc sensum obtrudere conati sunt.«

189 Simler, Scripta veterum, 192v.
190 Simler, Scripta veterum, 193v. Cf. Evag. h.e. 2,2; Niceph. h.e. 14,47; Bullinger,

De conciliis, 101r; Camerarius, Chronologia, 114.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

121

inclined to point to similarities between the two Councils of Ephe-
sus, which took place in equally chaotic and politicised circums-
tances,191 no such comparison is possible within the theological
framework of the Narratio. Instead, Simler affirms the traditional
view of Ephesus I as an authentic ecumenical council, despite its
partiality and the initial refusal of the Antiochenes to recognise its
decisions. Ephesus II, by contrast, is characterised as a pseudo-
council, presided over by an »anti-Cyril« in the person of Dios-
corus.

4.3 The Council of Chalcedon

Dioscorus’s treatment of Flavian and the Antiochenes outraged the
bishops of Syria, Pontus and Asia, who retaliated by breaking off
relations with Alexandria. However, the foremost spokesman of
the dyophysite party was Pope Leo, who denounced Ephesus II as
a »robber synod« (»latrocinium«). Simler, like his (western) source
Liberatus, emphasises the leadership shown by Leo at this time of
crisis and the effectiveness of his attempts to pressurise the empe-
ror into reversing the outcome of Ephesus II.192 These bore fruit
following the death of Theodosius II and the accession of Marcian,
who bowed to Leo’s demands for a new council, to be held at
Chalcedon. Simler sees the Council of Chalcedon as systematically
righting the wrongs of Ephesus II: first by absolving Flavian of any
wrongdoing, then by condemning Dioscorus and producing a new
Christological Definition, and finally by restoring Theodoret, Ibas
and the other disgraced Antiochenes to their sees. Although in-
stances of conflict – the shouts and interventions that punctuated
the public reading of the acta of Ephesus II during the first session,
the initial reluctance of the Illyrian bishops to subscribe to Leo’s
Tome, and the persistent obduracy of the Egyptians – are noted,
Simler presents proceedings at the council as generally harmonious
and well ordered, and hence very different from the chaos of Ephe-
sus II. He also uses this section of the Narratio to reinforce the
notion of the consensus patrum, by emphasising the endorsement

191 Ramsay MacMullen, Voting About God in Early Church Councils, New Haven

2006, 88f.

192 Simler, Scripta veterum, 193v–194r. Cf. Liberat. 12.

122

Mark Taplin

by those present of the works of both Cyril and Leo. Of particular
interest in this regard is his reporting of a moment during the
second session, when Archdeacon Aetius of Constantinople and,
ironically, Cyril’s old adversary Theodoret intervened to argue for
the compatibility of the Tome’s dyophysite language with Cyril’s
words.193 The effect of the incident is to demonstrate the under-
lying unity of the main Christological traditions in the fifth-century
church, which may explain why Simler gives it such prominence.
In his account of events at Chalcedon, Simler accords a signifi-
cant role to the Emperor Marcian, who is seen as embodying the
qualities of the ideal Christian magistrate. Like the Greek church
historians, Simler emphasises Marcian’s piety and love of justice.
Significantly, he reproduces the comparison drawn by Nicephorus
between Marcian and the archetypal Christian monarch, Constan-
tine, whom Marcian sought consciously to emulate by participa-
ting in conciliar debates.194 In the Narratio, Marcian both sets the
terms for the bishops’ deliberations at Chalcedon and gives legal
force to their decisions; Simler notes the emperor’s personal end-
orsement of the Definition at the council’s sixth session and his
later promulgation of an edict confirming its decisions and con-
demning Eutyches and Dioscorus.195 In highlighting Marcian’s
contribution, the Narratio follows Bullinger’s De conciliis, which
gives him much of the credit for Chalcedon’s successful outcome.196
What is more, Simler portrays the emperor as an authoritative
interpreter of Chalcedon, citing with approval a letter to the
monks of Jerusalem in which Marcian defends the phrase »in two
natures« as an expression of the church’s unchanging faith in
Christ.197

193 Simler, Scripta veterum, 194v. Cf. Liberat. 13; Evag. h.e. 2,18; Niceph. h.e.

15,30.

194 Simler, Scripta veterum, 194r. Cf. Niceph. h.e. 15,1–2. Simler highlights Mar-
cian’s decision to convene the council on the Bosphorus so that he might contribute
directly to its discussions, as Constantine had done at Nicaea. A further symbolic link
between the two assemblies is established by the fact that Chalcedon was attended by
exactly twice as many bishops – 636 – as its illustrious predecessor (ibid., 194v).

195 For the edict, see Codex Justinianus, ed. Paul Krueger, Berlin 1954, p. 6 (1.1.4). It

is reproduced in Bibliander, De summa trinitate, 32–34.

196 Bullinger, De conciliis, 102r: »Congregatis autem his in templo, medium se inter
ipsos collocavit Martianus Imperator, ut disputationes vehementiores et assertiones Epi-
scoporum quorundam ferventiores modareretur atque compesceret.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

123

4.4. Zeno and Anastasius

However, Marcian bequeathed a divided church and empire to his
successors, as the majority of the population of Egypt and Syria
remained steadfastly opposed to the Chalcedonian settlement. In
the second half of the fifth century, imperial religious policy fluc-
tuated between defence of Chalcedon (Leo), attempts at reconci-
liation with the monophysites (Zeno, Anastasius), and open Eu-
tychianism (Basiliscus).198 Simler sees the eastern church as split
into three factions: orthodox Chalcedonians, neutrals and mono-
physites. The approach of the »middle« party was encapsulated in
Zeno’s Henotikon, which sought to reunite the eastern patriar-
chates by sidelining Chalcedon, though without explicitly abro-
gating its conclusions. In De summa trinitate, Bibliander praises
the Henotikon for its championing of the Nicene creed as the basis
for church unity,199 but Simler is much less enthusiastic. Like his
neo-Chalcedonian source Evagrius, he detects an element of logo-
machia in the dispute between supporters and opponents of Chal-
cedon, and regards the preferred Christological formulations of the
orthodox and monophysite parties – respectively, »in two natures«
and »from two natures« – not as conflicting, but as potentially
complementary.200 However, because the anti-Chalcedonian party
included some who rejected the doctrine of two natures »not in
words but in substance« (»non verbis sed reipsa«), Zeno’s at-
tempts to devise a doctrinal settlement acceptable to all sides were

197 Simler, Scripta veterum, 196v–197r: »Extant literae Martiani Imperatoris ad Ar-
chimandritas monachos et reliquos habitatores Aeliae (ita enim Hiersolyma tum no-
minabatur) in quibus graviter monachos incusat, qui quum deberent quieti vacare, et
esse sub sacerdotibus eorumque doctrinis obedire, doctorum munus sibi sumpserint, et
praeterea tot malorum authores urbi et regioni fuerint. Ignoscit tamen illis clementis-
simus Imperator, et in fide eos instruit, docens Chalcedone nihil in fide innovatum esse,
neque duos filios Synodum praedicasse, sed potius damnasse eos qui sic sentiant: no-
mine autem naturae usos ut ostenderent Christum esse verum Deum et verum hominem,
ita ut natura significet veritatem, sicut et apud Apostolum, falsos Deos nuncupantem
eos qui natura non sint dii.« For the emperor’s letter, see ACO1 2.5, p. 4–7.

198 See Meyendorff, Imperial Unity, 187–206; Sellers, Chalcedon, 254–301; William
H.C. Frend, The Rise of the Monophysite Movement: Chapters in the History of the
Church in the Fifth and Sixth Centuries, Cambridge 1972, 143–220.

199 Bibliander, De summa trinitate, 7–12.
200 Simler, Scripta veterum, 197r. Cf. Evag. h.e. 2,5; Niceph. h.e. 15,9.

124

Mark Taplin

bound to come to grief. Instead of ending the controversy, the
ambiguous language of the Henotikon played into the hands of the
monophysites, who interpreted it as condemning Chalcedon.201
The restoration of communion between Acacius of Constantinople
and the monophysite-dominated see of Alexandria also had the
effect of provoking a new split (the Acacian schism) between East
and West, for the papacy rejected any concessions to Eutychia-
nism.202 Even in the East, the achievement of unity was shortlived,
with the Henotikon failing to satisfy the demands of more extreme
monophysites such as Severus of Antioch for an explicit repudi-
ation of Chalcedon and the Tome.203 Under Anastasius, the drift
towards monophysitism accelerated; although in the Narratio he is
described as adopting a neutral position, his hostility towards out-
spoken Chalcedonians and the increasing assertiveness of the mo-
nophysites during his reign are highlighted.204 For Simler, these
developments are the inevitable result of a religious policy predi-
cated on covering up of differences, rather than clear articulation
of the church’s beliefs. The fate of the Henotikon offers a general
lesson with contemporary resonance: »ambiguous doctrinal for-
mulas« are a recipe not for unity but for »bigger conflicts« in the
future.205 Simler may well have had in mind the situation of the
Rhaetian magistrates to whom his work is dedicated, who were
themselves under pressure to accommodate religious dissidents by
making precisely such concessions.

4.5 Justinian and the Second Council of Constantinople

The replacement of Anastasius by the strongly Chalcedonian Justin
I brought the period of monophysite ascendancy to an end. This

201 Simler, Scripta veterum, 200v.
202 Simler, Scripta veterum, 200r.
203 Simler, Scripta veterum, 200v.
204 Simler, Scripta veterum, 200v–201r.
205 Simler, Scripta veterum, 200v: »Quare si controversiae de religione existent, frus-
tra conciliatio tentatur ambiguis formulis doctrinae in medium propositis, sed ut verus
et constans sit ecclesiarum consensus, oportet ut sententiae de controversis quaestioni-
bus dicantur et proponantur perspicue absque ulla ambiguitate et sophistica, id ni fiat
consensiones fucatae tandem in maiora dissidia abeunt: idque non modo Zenonii edicti
exemplum, sed nostrae quoque aetatis non obscura exempla satis probant.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

125

change of policy did not preclude continuing attempts to pursue
dialogue with the »Eutychians«, especially under Justin’s nephew
Justinian, whose own neo-Chalcedonian theology was designed to
facilitate their return to the fold.206 Generally, however, Reformed
writers depict Justinian as a hero of orthodoxy, the Christian em-
peror par excellence. Bibliander describes his accession in provi-
dential terms: at a time of great peril for Rome, with the Jews and
Samaritans in revolt in Palestine, the empire under attack from the
Arabs and Persians, orthodox believers in the West suffering per-
secution by the Arian Goths and Vandals, Eutychianism rampant
in the East, and the papacy everywhere beginning to flex its mus-
cles, God armed the church with a »sword of Gideon« in the form
of Justinian’s anti-heresy legislation.207 Simler’s tone is more me-
asured, but he, too, emphasises the pro-Chalcedonian elements of
Justinian’s religious policy, such as his support for the condem-
nation of the Syrian monophysites Severus, Peter of Apamea and
Zooras at the synod of Constantinople, which reaffirmed the au-
thority of Chalcedon and the Tome.208 On the other hand, he is
unable to overlook entirely aspects of Justinian’s rule that conflic-
ted with this orthodox image, notably the monophysite sympathies
of his wife Theodora and Justinian’s own support for the aph-
thartodocetite heresy (which proclaimed the incorruptibility of
Christ’s human nature) towards the end of his reign. Unlike Bi-
bliander, who glosses over the episode,209 Simler faithfully repro-
duces the Greek church historians’ account of Justinian’s attempts
to impose aphthartodocetism on the empire.210 Even the central
religious event of Justinian’s reign – the Fifth Ecumenical Council –
poses some difficulties for him. As we have seen, Simler was un-
comfortable with Constantinople II’s anathematisation of the
Three Chapters, which was hard to square with his belief in the
compatibility of the Antiochene and Cyrilline traditions. While ac-

206 Meyendorff, Imperial Unity, 207–250.
207 Bibliander, De summa trinitate, 22f.
208 Simler, Scripta veterum, 203r. See the »Constitutio sacra Iustiniani imperatoris
contra Anthimum, Severum, Petrum et Zoarem« in: Justinian, Novellae, ed. Rudolf
Schoell and Wilhelm Kroll, Berlin 61954, 263–269 (no. 42). This edict is reproduced in
Bibliander, De summa trinitate, 39–47.

209 Bibliander, De summa trinitate, 51.
210 Simler, Scripta veterum, 8v, 205r. Cf. Evag. h.e. 4,38–40; Niceph. h.e. 17,29–31.

126

Mark Taplin

cepting the council’s conclusions, as set out in its 14 articles of
faith, he devotes remarkably little space to its deliberations on the
Three Chapters, focusing instead on its pronouncements against
Origenism. The sense that Simler’s endorsement of Constantinople
II is lukewarm, at best, is reinforced by his account of the back-
ground to its convocation. This is taken almost verbatim from
Liberatus, a source hostile to the council, who blames the Orige-
nist bishop Theodore Askidas for initiating the campaign against
the Three Chapters as a means of diverting attention from his own
errors.211 Like the Nestorian controversy, the sixth century con-
fronts Simler with evidence of competing theological currents wit-
hin orthodoxy – neo-Chalcedonianism and the more pronounced
dyophysitism of western writers such as Liberatus – that sits awk-
wardly with the notion of a consensus patrum. In the case of Con-
stantinople II, he leaves this tension substantially unresolved.

4.6 The monothelete controversy

Simler has little to say about the reigns of the late sixth-century
emperors Justin II (565–578), Tiberius (578–582) and Maurice
(582–602), all of whom he considers strong supporters of Chal-
cedon. In fact, both Justin and Tiberius pursued a policy of con-
ciliation with the monophysites – with some success – but these
developments were not recorded in Evagrius, Simler’s main source
for the period.212 The narrative is resumed in the early seventh
century, with the promotion by the Emperor Heraclius (610–641)
and the Constantinopolitan patriarch Sergius of monotheletism –
the doctrine that Christ possesses a single will – as a means of
reconciling Chalcedonians and monophysites. For Simler, mono-
theletism represents not so much an independent heresy as a dis-
guised form of Eutychianism. Like the earlier disputes outlined in
the Narratio, the monothelete controversy is presented in binary
terms, as a conflict between clearly defined orthodox and heretical
camps. To Heraclius and his monothelete grandson Constans II
(641–668), Simler opposes a new set of orthodox stalwarts: So-

211 Simler, Scripta veterum, 204r. Cf. Liberat. 24.
212 Allen, Evagrius, 19f. On the religious policies of Justinian’s successors, see Mey-

endorff, Imperial Unity, 258–265; Frend, Monophysite Movement, 317–335.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

127

phronius of Jerusalem, Maximus Confessor and the popes John IV
(640–642) and Martin I (649–655). Once again, he emphasises the
need for terminological clarity when tackling complicated doctri-
nal questions. The failure of imperial attempts to resolve the con-
troversy by imposing silence on the issues in dispute is contrasted
with the success of Constantinople III – an unambiguously dyo-
thelete council, convened by an orthodox emperor in the person of
Constantine IV (668–685) – in restoring religious unity to Byzan-
tium.213

4.7. Simler’s view of monophysitism

Recent studies of Christology in the period after Chalcedon tend to
downplay the differences between mainstream monophysites and
their Chalcedonian opponents. It has been pointed out, for instan-
ce, that the influential monophysite bishop of Alexandria, Timothy
Aelurus, affirmed the doctrine of the double consubstantiality of
Christ and wrote against Eutyches;214 even Severus, who rejected
both Chalcedon and the Henotikon, was prepared to speak of two
natures in respect of Christ, if only εÆ ν ϑεωριÂ ìα.215 Both monophy-
sites and non-Antiochene Chalcedonians took their inspiration
from Cyril, disagreeing only on the extent to which his language
could be reconciled with Chalcedon. But in the Narratio the dif-
ferences between the two sides are presented in much starker
terms. Lacking direct access to the works of monophysite theolo-
gians, Simler bases his assessment of their doctrines entirely on
Chalcedonian sources, which focus on the more »extreme« aspects
of monophysite teaching, associated with Eutyches himself and
disavowed by many later anti-Chalcedonians, such as denial of the
double consubstantiality of Christ and support for the doctrine of

213 Simler, Scripta veterum, 205v. In his »Ekthesis« (638), which enshrined mono-
theletism as official doctrine in the East, Heraclius forbade further discussion of the
number of energies in Christ. The »Typos« of Constans II (648) extended this prohi-
bition to the question of the number of wills in Christ. See John F. Haldon, Byzantium
in the Seventh Century: The Transformation of a Culture, Cambridge 1990, 301, 309.
214 Iain R. Torrance, Christology after Chalcedon: Severus of Antioch and Sergius the

Monophysite, Norwich 1988, 9.

215 Torrance, Christology after Chalcedon, 16; Sellers, Chalcedon, 262; Meyendorff,

Imperial Unity, 251f.

128

Mark Taplin

Christ’s »heavenly flesh«.216 This emphasis suits Simler’s polemical
purpose, as it appears to substantiate his claims of a link between
the monophysites and Reformation-era »heretics« who professed
similar doctrines.

As we have seen, in his account of Ephesus II Simler highlights
the aggressive and underhand means by which Dioscorus sought to
gain control of the church. The readiness of the »Eutychian« le-
adership to deploy violence in pursuit of its ends – even where that
involved challenging imperial authority – is a recurrent theme in
the Narratio, serving to underline monophysitism’s seditious and
anarchic character. Thus Simler records that, following the repla-
cement of Dioscorus as bishop of Alexandria by the orthodox Pro-
terius, local magistrates and imperial troops were burnt alive by a
monophysite mob stirred up by Timothy Aelurus. Timothy also
conspired in the subsequent murder – for Simler and his Chalce-
donian sources, it has the character of a martyrdom – of Proterius
in the baptistery of his cathedral at Easter 457.217 Such disturban-
ces were not confined to Egypt. In Antioch, the orthodox bishop
Stephen was killed by supporters of his monophysite rival Peter the
Fuller,218 while in Palestine, monks opposed to Chalcedon replaced
Bishop Juvenal of Jerusalem with the Eutychian Theodosius, who
launched a savage persecution in which the orthodox deacon
Athanasius was tortured to death and bishop Severianus of Scy-
thopolis assassinated.219 Even the imperial capital was not spared
such violence. Under Zeno, monks from the convent of the Ako-
imetai, a dyophysite stronghold, were attacked and killed by sup-
porters of Patriarch Acacius after publishing Pope Felix III’s sen-
tence of excommunication against him.220

To account for the repeated failure of imperial attempts to bro-
ker an agreement with the monophysites, Simler falls back on a
Reformed commonplace – the perfidiousness of heretics. Peter
Mongus, who succeeded Timothy Aelurus as bishop of Alexan-
dria, is called a »slippery and inconstant man, blowing hot and

216 Simler, Scripta veterum, 207r–v.
217 Simler, Scripta veterum, 196v–197r.
218 Simler, Scripta veterum, 198r.
219 Simler, Scripta veterum, 196v.
220 Simler, Scripta veterum, 199v–200r.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

129

cold from the same mouth«.221 In letters to Acacius of Constanti-
nople and Pope Simplicius, he protested his loyalty to Chalcedon,
but at home he condemned the council and Leo’s Tome, anathe-
matising all who refused to receive the writings of Dioscorus and
Timothy.222 Severus, the most important monophysite theologian
of the early sixth century, is depicted in even more sinister terms.
Simler reports that he was rumoured to be an insincere convert to
Christianity and that he continued to sacrifice to demons even
after his baptism. When lobbying for the position of bishop of
Antioch, Severus promised Emperor Anastasius that he would not
denounce Chalcedon if appointed, but he went back on his word
as soon as he was in post.223 The untrustworthiness of »Eutychi-
ans« is highlighted again in chapter 15 of the Narratio, on mo-
notheletism. Simler assigns a key role in the genesis of this heresy
to the Jacobite (monophysite) bishop of Antioch, who feigned ac-
ceptance of Chalcedon in order that he might lead the orthodox
church astray.224 In the same way, monotheletes at Constantinople
III used forged, interpolated or abridged texts of the Fathers to
garner support for their arguments.225

Another key feature of monophysitism, as portrayed in the Nar-
ratio, is its labile and polymorphous nature, which places it in
direct opposition to the unchanging, univocal teaching of the Fat-
hers. Simler terms Eutychianism a »Lernaean hydra«, producing
new heads whenever one was cut off.226 The heresy is shown to
have evolved over time: whereas Eutyches taught that the Word
was literally converted into flesh at the incarnation, his later fol-
lowers embraced a form of docetism, to counter the perception

221 Simler, Scripta veterum, 199v: »fuit enim homo lubricus et inconstans qui ex

eodem ore calidum et frigidum efflaret.«

222 Simler, Scripta veterum, 200v.
223 Simler, Scripta veterum, 201r.
224 Simler, Scripta veterum, 205r. Cf. George Cedrenus, Compendium historiarum
(PG 121, 23–1166; 122, 9–368) [Cedren. c.h.] 121, c. 806; John Zonaras, Epitome
historiarum (PG 134, 39–1414; 135, 9–388) 14,17; Camerarius, Chronologia, 119f.

225 Simler, Scripta veterum, 206v: »Est vero notatu digna Macarii et aliorum Mo-
nothelitarum fraus in hoc Synodo detecta, qui plurima patrum testimonia congesserunt
ad suum dogma comprobandum, quorum aliqua falso suis auctoribus inscripta fuerunt,
ut epistola Mennae ad Vigilium PP. alia vero corrupta aut truncata, id quod collatione
authenticum codicum deprehensum est.« Cf. ACO2 2, 532f.

226 Simler, Scripta veterum, 169v.

130

Mark Taplin

that they preached a passible God.227 United only by their belief in
the single nature of the Word made flesh, the monophysites quickly
began to fall out among themselves, splitting into numerous com-
peting sects. Based on information from Nicephorus and, to a les-
ser extent, John Damascene, Simler identifies eight distinct mo-
nophysite factions: the Eutychians proper; the Acephali or Egyp-
tians; the theopaschites, followers of Peter the Fuller; the Agnoe-
tae, also known as Severitae or Themistiani; the Aphthartodocitae;
the Tritheitae, who were themselves divided into two groups, de-
signated the Petritae and the Cononitae after their respective foun-
ders; the Theodosiani, also known as the Angelitae or Damianis-
tae; and the monotheletes.228 This heresiological scheme is desig-
ned to illustrate a more fundamental point, applicable not just to
the history of the early church but to theological disputes general-
ly. Elsewhere Simler ascribes to heresy an in-built propensity to
change, degenerate and spawn new errors,229 a thesis for which he
finds ample support in the history of monophysitism after Chal-
cedon. Peter the Fuller may be best known for his addition of the
phrase »who was crucified for us« to the Trisagion, but he also
introduced the practice of invoking the Virgin in prayer; in this
manner, the Eutychian controversy fostered the emergence of
»new forms of worship and prayers to the dead«.230 In the late
sixth century, disputes between the various monophysite groupings
spilled over into disagreements concerning the Trinity, with one

227 Simler, Scripta veterum, 207r. Simler acknowledges that his sources differ on the
precise nature of Eutyches’ error. For example, Evagrius and Nicephorus attribute to
Eutyches the opinion that Christ became incarnate only »apparently«, whereas Cedre-
nus accuses him of making the divine nature passible. Cf. Evag. h.e. 1,9; Niceph. h.e.
14,47; Cedren. c.h. 121, c. 658.

228 Simler, Scripta veterum, 201v–202r, 207v–208r. Cf. Niceph. h.e. 18,49–53; John
Damascene, De haeresibus (PG 94, 677–780) [Jo. D. haer.] 82–5, 99. See also the
descriptions of monophysite and monothelete sects in Ecclesiastica historia, vol. 5,
615–620; vol. 6, 303–307, 311f.; vol. 7, 122–131.

229 Simler, De aeterno, εr; Josias Simler, Assertio orthodoxae doctrinae de duabus
naturis Christi servatoris nostri, opposita blasphemiis et sophismatibus Simonis Bud-
naei nuper ab ipso in Lituania evulgatis […], Zurich: Christoph Froschauer the Youn-
ger, 1575 (BZD C 897), 4v–5r. See Taplin, Italian Reformers, 202f.

230 Simler, Scripta veterum, 198r: »Cnapheo huic tribuunt historiae quod sancierit ut
in precatione omni Dei genitrix nominaretur, et divinum eius nomen invoceretur. Ita
scilicet paulatim haec dissidia ad confirmandos novos cultus, et mortuorum invocati-
onem declinarunt.« Cf. Ecclesiastica historia, vol. 5, 989.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

131

group (the Theodosiani) being accused of Sabellianism or teaching
a quaternity, while others, led by the grammarian John Philopo-
nus, espoused forms of tritheism.231

4.8 Islam

By the time of the Sixth Ecumenical Council, a large portion of
Byzantine territory had been ceded to Islam, whose rise Simler
considers the most important long-term consequence of the Eu-
tychian controversy. Unlike the authors of the Magdeburg Cen-
turies, who classify Islam as a »religio externa«, cobbled together
from elements of paganism, Judaism and Christianity,232 Simler
follows John Damascene and subsequent medieval tradition in vie-
wing »the Mohammedan impiety« as the last and most pernicious
of the heresies of Christian antiquity.233 In the Narratio, the whirl-
wind Islamic conquest of Syria and Egypt is blamed on the pre-
sence within those provinces of significant numbers of Nestorians
and monophysites, who accepted Muslim rule more easily because
of the resemblance between their own errors and the »madness« of
the Qur’an.234 To substantiate the link that he posits between
earlier heresies and Islam, Simler recounts the well-known legend
of Sergius, which identified a fugitive Nestorian monk as the sour-
ce for Mohammed’s errors.235 He explains Mohammed’s purely

231 Simler, Scripta veterum, 208r. On these schisms, see Meyendorff, Imperial Unity,

254–258; Frend, Monophysite Movement, 289–291, 341f.

232 Ecclesiastica historia, vol. 7, 595–653.
233 Simler, Scripta veterum, 169v.
234 Simler, Scripta veterum, 206v: »haec autem Monothelitica secta postrema est
earum quae impia temeritate personam et naturas Christi impugnarunt, dum enim hoc
certamen fervet Sarraceni Aegyptum et Syriam occuparunt, in quibus regionibus Euty-
chea impietas prorsus regnabat, et iidem mox Oriente potiti sunt, in quo Nestoriani non
pauci numero erant, et simul quoque Monophysitae seu Eutychiani: atque ut utriusque
sectae impietas in Alcoranici delirii sentinam confluxit, ita regiones quoque ipsae quae
protulerunt aluerunt et foverunt haec monstra sub Sarracenorum et Turcarum potes-
tatem et tyrannidem redactae sunt.«

235 According to Muslim tradition, Mohammed’s prophethood was recognised while
he was still a child by a Christian monk named Bah
ı¯ra. Middle Eastern Christians
˙
developed a negative version of the tale, which attributed authorship of the Qur’an to
ı¯ra, rather than to the illiterate Mohammed; see Barbara Roggema, A Christian
Bah
˙
Reading of the Qur’an: the Legend of Sergius-Bah
ı¯ra and its Use of Qur’an and Sı¯ra, in:
˙
Syrian Christians under Islam: The First Thousand Years, ed. David Thomas, Leiden

132

Mark Taplin

humanitarian Christology by adding a subtle twist to the traditi-
onal story: although Nestorius himself affirmed the divinity and
personality of the Logos, later Nestorians such as Sergius may have
radicalised the sect’s teachings – »as is usually the case« with her-
etics – so that they conformed more closely to the doctrines of Paul
of Samosata. Simler finds support for this claim in the writings of
Maxentius, who, long before the time of Mohammed, encountered
Nestorians who attributed to Christ a pre-eminence based solely
on his virgin birth and his possession of grace in full measure.236
Simler’s discussion of the origins of Islam in the Narratio was
motivated, in part, by apologetic concerns. In spring 1570, several
leading Reformed churchmen in the Palatinate had been exposed
as antitrinitarians; two of them, Johannes Sylvan and Adam
Neuser, had even been caught attempting to make contact with the
Ottoman sultan, Selim II.237 The episode was acutely embarrassing
for the Zurichers, as Sylvan was associated with the antidiscipli-
narian, »Zwinglian«, party in Heidelberg; unsurprisingly, it was
seized on by their theological opponents as evidence of an islami-

2001, 57–73. In Damascene’s »De haeresibus«, the monk is described as an Arian (Jo.
D. haer. 100; Daniel J. Sahas, John of Damascus on Islam: The »Heresy of the Ish-
maelites«, Leiden 1972, 73f.), but the »Apology« of Ps. Al-Kindi, in which he is first
given the name Sergius, labels him a Nestorian. Other writers suggest that Mohammed
was assisted by two different monks, identifying the former as a Nestorian and the
latter as variously an Arian or a Jacobite. The legend became widely known in western
Europe from the twelfth century, when Peter the Venerable commissioned a Latin trans-
lation of the Qur’an and other texts relating to Islam, including the »Apology«. This
»Corpus Toletanum« formed the basis for Theodor Bibliander’s Qur’an edition, in
which the Sergius story is cited as evidence of Nestorian influence on Mohammed. See
Machumetis Saracenorum principis eiusque successorum vitae, ac doctrina ipseque Al-
coran […], Basel: Johannes Oporin, 1543 (Moser, Bibliander, no. B–9.1), βr, β2r–v. For
Simler’s previous use of the legend, see Simler, De aeterno, 283r–v.

236 Simler, Scripta veterum, 179r: »Mentio etiam fit apud veteres Sergii monachi
Nestoriani qui Machometi praeceptor fuerit. Videntur autem posterioris Nestoriani er-
roris magistri sui, ut plerumque fit, auxisse, et ad Samosateni et Photini sententiam
inclinasse. Nam Maxentius obiicit Nestorianis sui temporis, qui tamen Machometi tem-
pora multum praecessit, quod Christum eo tantum excellentiorem factis faciant, quod
non naturae lege, sed novo modo ex spiritu sancto conceptus et ex virgine sit natus, et
quod non particularem gratiam acceperit, sed plenus sit gratia. Hos ergo Samosatenicos
furores cum Nestorianis deliriis permixtos a Sergio monacho accepit Machometus, et
eorum partem suo Alcorano inseruit, ubi Christo magnas quidem laudes tribuit, sed
tamen merum hominem esse ubique praedicat.«

237 For details, see Christopher Burchill, The Heidelberg Antitrinitarians, Baden-

Baden 1989 (Bibliotheca bibliographica Aureliana 120; Bibliotheca dissidentium 11).

Josias Simler and the Fathers

133

sing dimension to Reformed teaching. In the Scripta veterum, Sim-
ler seeks not only to limit the fallout from the affair, but to turn it
to the advantage of his orthodox Reformed allies in Graubünden.
In his main preface to the work, he condemns »the deceptions of
the new Samosatenians, and their secret conspiracies with the
Turks« (»novorum Samosateniorum fraudes, et clancularias cum
Turcis conspirationes«), while elsewhere he cites the activities of
the Heidelberg antitrinitarians to illustrate the dangers of allowing
Christological heresy to flourish within a state.238 This point is
developed in the Narratio, where he attributes Islam’s triumphant
progress to the failure of the Byzantine authorities to eradicate
monophysitism and its associated heresies, which left the eastern
empire divided and, consequently, vulnerable to Saracen incursi-
ons.239 Simler feared a repetition of these events in his own day,
given the spread of antitrinitarianism in eastern Europe and the
theological affinities that he perceived between its »Samosatenian«
variant, in particular, and Islam.240 In the Scripta veterum, the par-
allel is extended to critics of the Rhaetian anti-heresy edict, who,
Simler claims, would leave the church with only »a certain general
knowledge of Christ, shared with Mohammedanism«. Just as Mo-
hammed extended freedom of worship to all monotheists, so the
»Academici« promise salvation to all Christians who acknowledge
Christ as the Son of God and judge of the world, »regardless of
what they think about the remaining doctrines of the faith.«241 By

238 Simler, Scripta veterum, *5r; ZB Ms. F 46, 350, cited in Taplin, Italian Reformers,

249, n. 146.

239 See the passage cited in n. 234 above. Cf. Bullinger, De conciliis, 107r: »Horret
sane animus, quoties recogito, quam funestos luctus, quam acerba iurgia, et quam
pestifera schismata, et quanta scandala et vulnera ecclesiae Christi inflixerint Nestori-
ana (ut iam de Arianis nihil dicam) Eutychiana ac Monothelitica monstra. Infecti fu-
erunt hac peste aliquot Graeci Imperatores qui Episcopos nunc deiecerunt, mox eve-
xerunt, atque ita turbarunt prope Orientem, ut miser populus quo se verteret aut quid
crederet propemodum ignoraret. Debemus sectis illis irreconciliabilique dissidio Macho-
metanam illam pestem, et quod totus propemodum Oriens a Christo ad Machometum
defecit.«

240 Simler, De aeterno, ε3r–v, 283v.
241 Simler, Scripta veterum, *3v: »O Sathanam vafrum artificium, qui cum tot annis
laborarit in oppugnanda Christi religione, novis subinde erroribus per haereticos in
publicum prolatis, nunc persuadere conatur, haec omnia adiaphora esse, de quibus
absque iactura salutis liceat opinari quicquid cuique lubitum fuerit: interim pro Chris-
tianorum fide obtrudit generalem quandam Christi notitiam, cum Machometanismo

134

Mark Taplin

associating the dissidents within the Bündner Reformed church
with Christendom’s most persistent foe, Simler places them in op-
position to legitimate magisterial authority and highlights the sub-
versive consequences of the »liberty« that they advocate. In the
process, he is able to distance himself and his colleagues from the
recent scandal in the Palatinate and to re-emphasise the compati-
bility of Reformed Protestantism with established political and so-
cial structures.

5. Old wine in new wineskins?

The »Scripta veterum« as polemic

5.1 Approach

Simler’s comparison of the Rhaetian »Academici« to Mohammed
is an example of the dual perspective that informs the Scripta ve-
terum. Like other early modern controversialists, Simler sees the
disputes generated by the Reformation not as unique products of
the age, but as merely the latest episodes in an on-going struggle
between truth and error, Christ and Satan, for ascendancy within
the church. In this context, the history of ancient Christianity be-
comes a crucial resource, providing Simler and his contemporaries
with a ready-made heresiological vocabulary and interpretative
framework that can be applied to the deviant teaching of their own
day. Such an approach has the advantage of both delegitimising
opponents, by attaching them to sects and individuals condemned
by the early church, and vindicating the position of the writer, who
is automatically cast in the role of defender of the orthodox faith.
However, it is more than a rhetorical strategy, for underpinning it
is a view of Christian history as »a static entity with substantially
the same events being re-enacted by different characters«.242 Thus

communem. Atque ut Mahumetes inquit, legem sive fidem omnium unam esse, ritus
autem, diversus, singulos autem in suo ritu servari asserit, modo unum Deum mundi
creatorem agnoscant, ita isti in Christiano tantum requirunt, ut etiam non intellecto
Christi statu et officio Christum filium Dei et mundi iudicem agnoscat, ac salutem
pollicentur hoc credenti, quicquid de reliquis dogmatibus fidei nostrae sentiat.«

242 Backus, Historical Method, 338.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

135

Melanchthon declares that all sixteenth-century doctrinal disputes
were prefigured in the sub-apostolic age,243 while the Magdeburg
Centuriators note the repeated use of the same »tricks« by heretics
to seduce the faithful.244 The parallels between ancient and modern
heresy are also emphasised by Beza, who in the preface to his
Gentile collection describes how, having failed once again to des-
troy church through persecution, Satan has reverted to his »old
tactics« of corrupting it from within. The heretics whom he has
raised up in response to the Reformation are linked to some of the
Fathers’ most fearsome opponents: in Schwenckfeld, Beza sees a
new Eutyches, in Menno Simons, a reborn »Ebion«, and in Ser-
vetus, an amalgam of Paul of Samosata, Arius and Eutyches.245 He
returns to the point in his edition of patristic works in defence of
the Trinity, which he commends to the churches »not just on ac-
count of their sound doctrine and erudition, but especially because
of the antiquity and dignity of their authors, so that all may see
that nothing propounded by these damned souls [contemporary
antitrinitarians] has not been refuted and condemned a thousand
times by the whole pure and ancient church«.246

For Simler, too, the ancient Christological controversies are im-
portant primarily for the light that they shed on contemporary
disputes. Although he is aware that various Nestorian and mono-
physite churches survived the Islamic conquest, his knowledge of
the doctrines and practices of groups such as the Syrian Jacobites,
Armenians and Assyrians is decidedly sketchy.247 Unlike his Zurich
colleague Bibliander, Simler displays little interest in these faraway
sects, preferring to seek the modern-day exponents of Nestoria-
nism and Eutychianism closer to home. Detailed consideration of
such parallels is reserved for chapters 7 and 17 of the Narratio, but

243 Peter Fraenkel, Testimonia Patrum: The Function of the Patristic Argument in the
Theology of Philip Melanchthon, Geneva 1961 (Travaux d’Humanisme et Renaissance
46), 284.

244 Ecclesiastica Historia, vol. 1, αv; Scheible, Anfänge, 64f.
245 CTB 8, 240. In Georg Cassander’s »Commentarius de duabus in Christo naturis«,
which was appended to his Vigilius edition, Simons and another Dutch Anabaptist,
Adam Pastor, are compared to Eutyches and Paul of Samosata respectively (fo. 2r).

246 CTB 11, 781.
247 For example, he wrongly associates the Maronites of Lebanon with Nestorianism;
see Simler, Scripta veterum, 179r. Most of his information on the non-Chalcedonian
churches is taken from Nicephorus.

136

Mark Taplin

the interconnectedness of ancient and contemporary doctrinal dis-
putes is highlighted even in the more strictly historical sections of
the work. Simler’s use of the Henotikon episode as a warning
against theological obfuscation, including in his own day, has been
mentioned. In the same way, he detects a structural similarity bet-
ween Nestorianism, Arianism and Eutychianism – all of which ori-
ginated as responses to earlier heresies – and the more recent errors
of »the Anabaptists, Servetians and new Samosatenians, who have
changed many things, causing great offence to many and with no
little harm to the church, solely on the basis that everything that is
taught under the papacy is to be shunned and rejected.«248 Because
of his involvement in contemporary Christological debates, Simler
tends to view the disputes chronicled in the Scripta veterum
through the prism of sixteenth-century theological concerns. Alt-
hough the main point at issue in the Zurich church’s exchange
with the Württembergers – the location of Christ’s glorified body –
played a peripheral role in the Eutychian controversy, Simler por-
trays the questions at stake in the two disputes as substantially the
same. In particular, he insists that Eutyches was condemned not
merely for confusing the two natures of Christ on an »essential«
level but for eroding the distinction between the properties asso-
ciated with those natures – precisely the error that the Zurichers
attributed to Brenz.249

248 Simler, Scripta veterum, 178r: »Videmus autem omnibus seculis nimio contradi-
cendi studio dum dogmata controversa quidam propugnant, in alteram partem aber-
ratum esse, sic multi Sabellium fugientes in Arianismum inciderunt, sic Nestorius studio
evitandi haeresim Apollinaris novae et contrariae auctor factus, et idem circa Nestorium
accidit Eutycheti: et hodie in ecclesiis Anabaptistae, Servetani et novi Samosateniani
plurima immutarunt magna multorum offensione, et damno non levi ecclesiae, hoc uno
titulo quod omnia quae doceantur in papatu fugienda et recusanda sint.«

249 Simler, Scripta veterum, 207r: »Postremo si de sententia Eutychetis ex Synodi
Chalcedoniae decreto statuendum est, cum illic asseratur unum et eundem esse Iesum
Christum in duabus naturis αÆ συγχυÂ τος, αÆ τρεÂπτος, hoc est inconfuse et inconvertabili-
ter, efficitur Eutychianos docuisse mutationem et confusionem naturarum: neque tan-
tum essentiarum sed multo maxime proprietatum, unde eodem decreto traditur natu-
rarum differentiam non esse propter unitatem sublatam, sed magis utraque naturam
suam proprietatem servare. Itaque Vigilius et caeteri qui contra Eutychiam haeresim
scripserunt, id maxime elaborarunt ut utrunque naturae proprietatem salvam in Christo
ostenderent, credo enim forte illos a plerisque earum obtinere potuisse ut naturam
humanam absque suis proprietatibus in Christo faterentur, primam ut ita dicam essen-
tiam, nam Eutyches ipse agnoscebat in Christo humanum corpus, et omnes Christum

Josias Simler and the Fathers

137

5.2 Modern-day »Nestorians«: the Samosatenians and Stancaro

In the Scripta veterum, Simler confronts opponents from across the
confessional spectrum. Some targets were familiar from his earlier
polemical writings. Although the arguments of the eastern Euro-
pean antitrinitarian groups are not addressed in detail in the work,
having already been rebutted in De aeterno Dei filio, Simler iden-
tifies a number of points of similarity between Nestorianism and
contemporary »Samosatenianism«. The Samosatenians follow
Nestorius in asserting that Christ, like Moses, is designated God in
scripture solely in respect of his office, while their insistence that
they alone possess the true knowledge of God is foreshadowed in
Nestorius’s criticism of his flock for their ignorance of apostolic
doctrine.250 Simler contrasts the arrogance and elitism of the ra-
dicals, who reject point blank all extra-biblical authorities and lay
exclusive claim to the name of the true church, with the Reformed
attitude towards tradition, which balances informed criticism with
the respect due to antiquity.251

He detects even stronger echoes of Nestorianism in the distinc-
tive Christology of Francesco Stancaro. Simler’s emphasis in the
Narratio on the soteriological implications of Nestorius’s views is
testament to the extent to which his understanding of the Nesto-
rian controversy was influenced by his earlier polemical exchange
with Stancaro. Thus he argues that the principal bone of conten-
tion in the Zurichers’ dispute with Stancaro – the involvement of
Christ’s divinity in his mediatorial office – was also central to the
quarrel between Cyril and Nestorius. In support of this claim, he
cites Cyril’s tenth anathematism, which proclaimed the incarnate
Word »high priest and apostle« in the work of salvation. Accor-

Deum hominemque fatebantur, consubstantialem patri et nobis quoque consubstanti-
alem, verum potissima controversia fuit de perfecta natura habente suas proprietates.«
250 Simler, Scripta veterum, 72r: »Verba haec Nestorii libentius annoto quod nostra
aetate eodem fere modo argumentari soleant Blandrata Franciscus Davidis et alii qui
filium Deum suo honore et vera Deitate spoliare conantur. Atque etiam ut Nestorius
asserebat, populum propter ignorantiam dogmatis de cognitione Dei in errorem pro-
lapsum, ita hi sibi soli ac suis cognitionem Dei vendicant, eamque omnibus fere vete-
ribus et recentioribus orthodoxis adimunt.« Simler is probably alluding to the title of
the important antitrinitarian anthology »De vera et falsa unius Dei Patris, Filii et Spi-
ritus Sancti cognitione« (Alba Iulia 1568).

251 Simler, Scripta veterum, *2v; Taplin, Italian Reformers, 212f.

138

Mark Taplin

ding to Simler, the question put to Cyril by the oriental bishops
was identical to that posed by Stancaro: if the Word acts as high
priest on behalf of humanity, to which God does he minister?
Cyril’s response, like that of the Reformed, was that the Word is
designated high priest not because he sacrifices to a greater God
but on account of the expiation that he performs to bring believers
to faith in himself and the Father.252 Although Stancaro pays lip
service to orthodox Christology and claims to repudiate Nesto-
rius’s errors, by excluding Christ’s humanity from the office of
mediator he, too, violates the unity of the saviour’s person.253 The
intellectual kinship between Nestorius and Stancaro is confirmed
by the fact that both see Christ’s work of mediation as comparable
to that of Moses.254

5.3 Modern-day »Eutychians«: the Anabaptists and Schwenckfeld

While denouncing Stancaro as a Nestorian, Simler associates other
dissenting groups with the opposing heresy of Eutyches. The »fa-
natical« German Anabaptist Melchior Hoffman (d. 1543) is iden-
tified as the first to revive Eutychianism in modern times, on the
basis of his claim that the divine Word did not »assume« a human
nature from Mary – the orthodox position – but was instead liter-
ally »made flesh«.255 Simler bases his knowledge of Hoffman’s
views on statements made by the latter at the synod of Strasbourg
in June 1533, following which Hoffman was condemned to life-
long imprisonment;256 he adds that Melchiorite Christology was
subsequently taken up and disseminated by another leading Ana-
baptist, Menno Simons.257 Simler finds further proof of the con-

252 Simler, Scripta veterum, 191r. Cf. Cyr. apol. orient. c. 367f.
253 Simler, Scripta veterum, 191r.
254 Simler, Scripta veterum, 191v.
255 Simler, Scripta veterum, 209v. In Bullinger’s history of Anabaptism, which Simler
translated into Latin, Hoffman is ranked second only to Servetus among the »abomi-
nable« Anabaptists. For Hoffman’s Christology, see Klaus Depperman, Melchior Hoff-
man: Social Unrest and Apocalyptic Visions in the Age of Reformation, Edinburgh
1987, 223–229; George Huntston Williams, The Radical Reformation, Kirksville, MO
31992, 493–495.

256 Deppermann, Hoffman, 290–296.
257 Simler, Scripta veterum, 209r–v. On Menno’s Christology, see Williams, Radical

Reformation, 596–598.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

139

nection between Anabaptism and Eutychianism in Nicephorus. In
light of the Byzantine historian’s report that some monophysite
sects rejected infant baptism, it is »hardly surprising that their
teachings have been renewed and defended in our day by the Ana-
baptists, in particular«.258

Of more immediate concern for Simler in the Scripta veterum
were the teachings of Kaspar Schwenckfeld, which had been pro-
moted by Georg Frell in Chur and against which he warns in the
first of his two prefaces to the work. Schwenckfeld was a long-
standing opponent of the Zurichers. The threat posed by his doc-
trines, especially his unconventional Christology, is a recurrent
theme in Bullinger’s correspondence with the south German refor-
mers Ambrosius Blarer, Johannes Zwick and Martin Frecht during
the 1530s. Both the antistes’ commentary on John’s Gospel (1543)
and his Vigilius edition, which was published alongside the anti-
Schwenckfeldian Orthodoxa et erudita epistola of Joachim Vadi-
an, were directed in the main against Schwenckfeld.259 Like Bullin-
ger, Simler was convinced of
the »Eutychian« character of
Schwenckfeld’s Christology. In his Annotationes for Vigilius’s
Contra Eutychetem, he accuses the Schwenckfeldians of wilfully
misusing anti-Arian statements by the Fathers to support their
own, heretical, denial of the creatureliness of Christ’s flesh, just as
earlier monophysites had done.260 Schwenckfeld’s labelling of the
Reformed as Nestorians, on the basis that they attribute different
properties to Christ’s two natures, is another familiar Eutychian
refrain; in the early church, the same charge was levelled against

258 Simler, Scripta veterum, 202r: »hoc tamen praeterire non possum, Monophysitas
illas veteres suos quoque habere anabaptismos, ut minus mirum sit eorum dogmata
nostra aetate ab Anabaptistis potissimum renovari et defendi.« See also ibid., 209v: »ut
sicut primi fere Anabaptismos Eutychei usurparunt, ita vicissim eorum haeresim Ana-
baptistae renovarunt.« Cf. Niceph. h.e. 17,9.

259 Mark Taplin, Bullinger und die Dissidenten, in: Der Nachfolger: Heinrich Bullin-
ger (1504–1575). Katalog zur Ausstellung im Grossmünster Zürich 2004, ed. Emidio
Campi et al., Zurich 2004, 13–17. On Schwenckfeld’s Christology, see Paul L. Maier,
Caspar Schwenckfeld on the Person and Work of Christ: A Study of Schwenckfeldian
Theology at its Core, Assen 1959; Williams, Radical Reformation, pp. 495–9.

260 Simler, Scripta veterum, 113r: »Imitantur Eutychianos nostra aetate Schwencfel-
diani qui Patrum dicta contra Arrianos, quibus asserunt Filium Dei non esse creaturam,
detorquent ad suam opinionem comprobandam, quasi senserint carnem Christi non
esse creaturam.«

140

Mark Taplin

the orthodox by the monophysites, who – like Schwenckfeld –
appealed to Cyril’s fourth anathematism in support of their posi-
tion.261 In his Confession, Schwenckfeld seeks to distance himself
from Eutyches,262 but he does so on the basis that Eutyches’ error
was to deny the communicatio idiomatum, a claim unsupported by
the ancient sources. Even those theologians who agree with
Schwenckfeld on some points (presumably, Simler means the ubi-
quitarians) are united in condemning him as a Eutychian. Like the
ancient monophysites, he denies that Christ’s two natures may be
considered »distincte« and makes Christ’s whole person and both
natures subject to the passion. In rejecting the creatureliness of
Christ’s flesh, he comes close to the teachings of Apollinaris, as set
out in the fifth dialogue of Ps.Athanasius. Moreover, to exonerate
himself from the charge of monotheletism, he deliberately misin-
terprets the Sixth Ecumenical Council’s condemnation of this error
so as to limit it to the preaching of a single will in Christ before his
glorification.263

5.4 Catholicism

Previous Zurich Reformed writers had made frequent use of
church history to challenge the religious claims of the papacy and
Roman Catholicism more generally. However, the dedication of
the Scripta veterum to the Rhaetian Leagues, which were made up
of both Catholic and Reformed communities, placed severe cons-
traints on Simler’s ability to attack Catholic doctrine in the work.
Tobias Egli, who looked on Graubünden’s Catholics as key allies
in his campaign to purge the territory of religious radicals, was
keen that Simler should moderate his criticisms even of ubiquita-
rianism, lest Catholic opinion be offended,264 and Simler himself
emphasises the common interest of Reformed and Catholic Rha-

261 Simler, Scripta veterum, 190r.
262 Maier, Schwenckfeld, 63.
263 Simler, Scripta veterum, 210v: »Postremo negat duas esse voluntates Christi in
gloria, tempore quidem exinanitionis duas in Christo fuisse voluntates et monothelitas
ideo damnatos esse quod ante glorificationem Servatoris unam tantum in eo voluntatem
asserverint quod tamen falsum esse omnes norunt, qui vel obiter Acta Synodi inspexe-
runt.« On this point, see Maier, Schwenckfeld, 79.

264 Egli to Simler, 20 August 1571 (ZB Ms. F 59, 413r): »Minus autem moleste

Josias Simler and the Fathers

141

etians in standing up to »heresy«.265 His stance was influenced by
theological as well as political considerations. In their exchanges
with antitrinitarians and other radicals, the Zurich divines had
sought to exempt the doctrines of the Trinity and the two natures
of Christ from the general corruption of apostolic doctrine under
the papacy. The inclusion of texts by two popes, Leo and Gelasius,
in the Scripta veterum was consistent with this position, and had
the beneficial side-effect of making the work more palatable to
Rhaetian Catholics. Simler’s friendships with Catholic scholars
such as Aegidius Tschudi, with whom he collaborated on a new
history of the Swiss Confederation, and his favourable citation of
Cassander – a reformist Catholic – in the Scripta veterum itself,
provide further evidence of his relatively irenic attitude towards
Catholicism. It is striking that Catholics are the only major non-
Reformed group not to be charged directly with either Nestori-
anism or Eutychianism in the work.

Nonetheless, the Scripta veterum contains a significant amount
of covert polemic against Catholicism. In the preface addressed to
the Rhaetian Leagues, for example, Simler describes Leo and Ge-
lasius as representating »the ancient discipline of the church, which
had not yet been corrupted to such a great extent« (»illa veteri et
nondum adeo corrupta Ecclesiae disciplina«), thereby establishing
a clear distinction between these theologically trustworthy popes
and their contemporary successors in Rome.266 Specific Catholic
doctrinal positions are also targeted in the volume. In the Anno-
tationes for Ad Trasimundum, Simler casts doubt on the authority
of the Vulgate, contrasting Fulgentius’s use of alternative Latin
versions of scripture with the »superstitious« attachment of »some
today« to Jerome’s translation.267 In the Narratio, he uses the al-

ferimus, quod in Ubiquitatis monstro depingendo breviorem te morbus iniquus fecit: sic
enim Papistis nostris minori offensioni futurum speramus.«

265 ZB Ms. F 46, 349f.: »Und wiewol ettlich gemeinden und gerichten der Roemi-
schen oder wie sy sich nemmend der Catholischen religion sind hoff ich doch sy söllind
dise min arbeit nitt für übel uffnemmen, dann dise secten glich wol inen alß auch unß
widerig sind / so mag auch zuo gmeiner frid und einigkeit nitt erhalten werden«. Cited in
Taplin, Italian Reformers, 249, n. 146.

266 Simler, Scripta veterum,*2r.
267 Simler, Scripta veterum, 140r: »Apparet autem hinc Fulgentium non ita se supers-
titiose astrinxisse translationi vulgatae, ut hodie quidam faciunt.« Cf. Fulgentius of

142

Mark Taplin

leged heretical leanings of two early popes, Vigilius and Honorius I
(625–638) to challenge the notion of papal infallibility. Simler re-
produces evidence from Liberatus of Vigilius’s close and corrupt
relationship with the monophysite empress Theodora,268 while
from Honorius’s condemnation as a monothelete by the Sixth Ecu-
menical Council he concludes that »at that time popes were not yet
exempt from all judgment and scrutiny by synods«.269 Elsewhere
he highlights the failure of the papal legates at Chalcedon to over-
turn the council’s twenty-eighth canon, which accorded the see of
Constantinople second place in the ecclesiastical hierarchy after
Rome and was to become an important bone of contention bet-
ween the western and eastern churches.270

Other passages are suggestive of a link between Catholicism and
Christological heresy. As we have seen, Simler identifies the mo-
nophysite bishop Peter the Fuller as the originator of the (Catholic)
practice of addressing prayers to the Virgin. Catholics and Eutych-
ians are also said to resemble one another in their understanding of
the Eucharist, with the latter comparing the divinisation of
Christ’s humanity in the incarnation to the transubstantiation of
the sacramental bread and wine into Christ’s body and blood. The
Reformed position on the sacrament, by contrast, is aligned with
the uncorrupted doctrine of the primitive Roman church, as ex-
pounded by Pope Gelasius, who opposed any suggestion of a hy-
postatic union between the Eucharistic elements and Christ’s di-
vinity.271 In addition, Simler hints at an important indirect connec-

Ruspe, Libri tres ad Trasimundum Vandalorum regem (CCSL 91, 95–195; PL 65,
223–304) 2,15. The same point is made in the »Annotationes« for Maxentius; see
Simler, Scripta veterum, 72r.

268 Simler, Scripta veterum, 203r–204v. Cf. Liberat. 22. Simler defends the reliability

of Liberatus’s report, which others had dismissed as an interpolation.

269 Simler, Scripta veterum, 206v: »Maxime tamen omnium memorabile est quod
Honorius P.P. haereseos damnatus est, et ab ipsa Synodo et ab Imperatore et a Leone II.
PP. adeo tum nondum erant Papae ab omni iudicio et cognitione Synodorum exempti.«
Cf. Ecclesiastica Historia, vol. 7, 553f., where Honorius is classified as a monothelete.
See also Georg Kreuzer, Die Honoriusfrage im Mittelalter und in der Neuzeit, Stuttgart
1975 (Päpste und Papsttum 8), 185–190.

270 Simler, Scripta veterum, 196r.
271 Simler, Scripta veterum, 88r: »Porro in nostri Gelasii verbis quaeritur, quomodo
sacramenta seu symbola transeant in divinam substantiam: ac primum ex ipsius verbis
constat, illa non transsubstantiari, ut substantia panis esse desinat: inquit enim ea ma-
nere in suae proprietate naturae: neque forma aut figura illorum mutatur, quod nemo

Josias Simler and the Fathers

143

tion between Catholicism and Nestorianism. Cyril had won Ro-
me’s support for his campaign against Nestorius in part because
the latter was perceived as sympathetic to Pelagianism. This asso-
ciation was reinforced by Cassian, whose De incarnatione includes
the recantation of the former Pelagian Leporius.272 In his Annota-
tiones on the text, Simler endorses Cassian’s position, despite the
absence of corroborating testimony from Augustine.273 He returns
to the issue in the Narratio, noting the condemnation at Ephesus of
Pelagius and his follower Caelestius, who is said by Cyril to have
spoken out in support of Nestorius.274 Although the Pelagian and
Nestorian heresies were superficially very different, one relating to
Christ’s office, the other to his being, Simler perceives a natural
affinity between the two: Nestorius’s doctrine of two Christs, God
the Word and the divinised man Jesus, linked only »by partnership
and dignity« (»societate et dignitate«), fits seamlessly with the Pe-
lagian doctrine of the perfectibility of human nature.275 Given that
»Pelagianism« was the heresy most frequently associated with the
papacy by Reformed writers, the anti-Catholic significance of
Simler’s comments is unmistakeable. He goes on to make the point
that, whereas in the East Nestorianism was largely rooted out, in
the western church its Pelagian sister heresy gained the upper hand
to the extent that »for several centuries the memory of the benefits
of Christ was completely extinguished«, despite the best efforts of
Jerome, Augustine and Prosper of Aquitaine.276

unquam dixit, multo minus iunguntur divinitati hypostatice: transeunt ergo in divinam
substantiam, quod per significationem cum divina substantia coniunguntur, cum antea
fuerint res prophanae, divino autem instituto opera Spiritus sancti asciscuntur ad usum
sacramenti. Ita autem mutationem accipere veteres in symbolis sacris, multis testimoniis
ostendi potest«. Cf. Pope Gelasius I, Tractatus de duabus naturis in Christo adversus
Eutychem et Nestorium (PL Supplementum 3, 763–787) 14.

272 Cassian. c. Nest. 1,5.
273 Simler, Scripta veterum, 48r.
274 Simler, Scripta veterum, 170v, 174v.
275 Simler, Scripta veterum, 169v.
276 Simler, Scripta veterum, 169v: »Opposuerunt se Pelagiano furori celeberrimi eius
tempestatis Latinae ecclesiae doctores Hieronymus, Augustine, Prosper et alii, damnata
est eius doctrina aliquot synodis, in Palaestina et Africa, et in celeberrimo illo quoque
Ephesino conventu quo Nestorius damnatus est, nihilominus reliquiae huius haereseos
victoriam obtinuerunt, nam ex his seminibus pullularunt illa encomia humanorum me-
ritorum, quibus memoria beneficiorum Christi aliquot seculis pene extincta fuit.«

144

Mark Taplin

5.5 The »ubiquitarians«

In his prefaces to the Scripta veterum, Simler emphasises the threat
posed by the Samosatenians and other radicals, but in the Narratio
and Annotationes he expands the focus of his attacks to take in the
»ubiquitarian« Christology of the Württemberg Lutherans. Simler
drew a clear distinction between the Lutherans and those »here-
tics« against whom his previous polemical works had been direc-
ted. He acknowledged that the German churches included many
pious and orthodox Christians within their ranks, and was opti-
mistic that, with good will on both sides, the differences between
Lutherans and Reformed could be overcome or at least mitigated.
In his preface to Bullinger’s Adhortatio ad omnes verbi ministros,
ut contentiones mutuas deponant, he holds up the Polish Consen-
sus of Sandomierz (1570), which united Lutherans, Reformed and
Bohemian Brethren against antitrinitarianism, as an example of
what could be achieved;277 elsewhere, he commends the Gnesio-
Lutheran theologian Johannes Wigand on his efforts in defence of
Nicene orthodoxy.278 However, this irenical attitude did not ex-
tend to the Württembergers, whom Simler blamed for aggravating
the schism between the German and Swiss churches. When, in the
Narratio, he warns against the danger of allowing theological dis-
putes to become poisoned by personal animus and invective, it is
likely that he has Brenz and his disciples in mind.279 In his later
work De vera praesentia, he attempts to drive a wedge between the
»Brentiani« and »lovers of peace« in Germany by demonstrating
the conformity of Reformed teaching with the doctrines of the
ancient church and the Augsburg Confession (aside from the arti-
cle on the Eucharist).280 This strategy is foreshadowed in the Scrip-
ta veterum, where Simler emphasises the »Nestorian« and »Eu-
tychian« character of the ubiquitarian position, distinguishing it
from the supposedly more orthodox Christology of Luther himself.
Although keen to take the heat out of the Eucharistic controversy,

277 Cited in Wotschke, Briefwechsel, 348, n. 1.
278 Simler, De aeterno, 250r. The second book of Wigand’s »De Deo, contra arianos

novos in Polonia exortos« (1566) was included in Beza’s Gentile anthology.

279 Simler, Scripta veterum, 175v–176r.
280 Simler, De vera praesentia, 3r, 5v, 7r.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

145

which had done such profound damage to the cause of Protestant
unity, Simler seems to have viewed ubiquitarianism in a quite dif-
ferent light. At stake in this debate was not just the understanding
of the sacrament, an issue on which it might be possible to agree to
differ, but the fundamental »catholic« doctrines of God and
Christ, which Simler saw as fatally undermined by Brenz’s insis-
tence on a real communication of attributes between the human
and divine natures of Christ. For that reason, he tends to bracket
the Württembergers not with the Protestant mainstream but with
more clearly »heretical« thinkers such as Schwenckfeld.

Simler’s first task was to rebut the charge of Nestorianism tra-
ditionally levelled against the Zurichers by their opponents. Once
again, he finds a clear precedent for this scenario in the history of
the early church, which furnishes numerous examples of orthodox
churchmen (Ibas of Edessa, Macedonius of Constantinople, Fla-
vian of Antioch) who were denounced as Nestorians and perse-
cuted for upholding the faith of Chalcedon; from the works of Leo
and Vigilius, it would seem that this was a common calumny of the
Eutychians, who repeatedly accused the orthodox church of sub-
scribing to Nestorius’s heresy.281 Simler denies that Reformed
Christology serves to undermine the hypostatic union. Although
Christ’s glorified flesh is »locally« present only in heaven, his di-
vinity fills creation »not as the Word apart from the flesh but as
the Word united to the flesh«. When the Reformed deny that
Christ’s body is present substantially in the elements of the Lord’s
Supper, they »do not separate Christ’s divinity from his humanity,
but the substance of his human nature from the bread«. Wherever
the divine Word is at work, it is as Emmanuel, the Word made
flesh, in union with his »conjoined humanity«. It is impossible for
Christ’s humanity to be omnipresent or infinitely extensible, as the
ubiquitarians contend, since »a body that retains its nature cannot
be present except locally and in a corporeal manner.«282 At the

281 Simler, Scripta veterum, 179v.
282 Simler, Scripta veterum, 190r: »cum igitur dicimus Christi corpus non esse ita
realiter et substantialiter praesens in Coena, ut cum pane a ministro porrigatur, et
oraliter a piis atque impiis sumatur, hoc enim multi asserunt, non Christi divinitatem ab
humanitate separamus, sed humanae naturae substantiam a pane separamus: et a terris
et pane ac vino Coenae, nequaquam vero a divinitate corpus Christi tantum distare
dicimus, quantum supremum coelum a terra distat. Dicimus igitur ubicunque est divi-

146

Mark Taplin

Colloquy of Maulbronn (1564), Andreae himself accepted that
Christ’s humanity was restricted to one place during his earthly
mission, so how can he now argue that the Reformed position
entails a sundering of the two natures?283 Although the location of
Christ’s glorified flesh was a marginal issue for the Fathers, Simler
is able nonetheless to assemble evidence of patristic support for the
Zurich position from Theodoret, Vigilius, Fulgentius and, cruci-
ally, Cyril, who teaches that Christ is present on earth following
the ascension not carnally, but spiritually and through his divini-
ty.284

Like previous Zurich writers against Lutheranism, Simler is at
pains to demonstrate Zwingli’s orthodoxy, a cause that had be-
come inextricably bound up with the honour of the Zurich church.
In particular, he defends Zwingli’s much-criticised application of
the term alloiosis to the hypostatic union. Employing the charac-
teristic Bullingerian distinction between the verbum and res of
theological discourse, Simler argues that alloiosis in Zwingli is
equivalent to what Cassian calls synecdoche and John Damascene
antidosis: all of these terms connote an exchange of properties, on
a verbal level, between two intimately connected realities. The Lu-
therans do Zwingli a great injustice when they accuse him of re-
ducing Christ to a mere man, divine in name only. His teachings
can in no way be compared to the position of Nestorius, who
showed his rejection of the communicatio idiomatum by advoca-

nitas sive in coelo sive in terra, sive in actione Coenae sive extra illam suis adest, ibi
habet coniunctam humanitatem, agit enim omnia non ut nudum absque carne Verbum,
sed ut Immanuel sive Verbum incarnatum, si autem inde efficeretur humanam Christi
naturam realiter et substantialiter illic praesentem esse, omnino statuere oporteret ex-
tensionem humanae naturae in infinitum, ut loco omni adsit, corpus enim suam natu-
ram servans non nisi localiter et corporaliter praesens esse potest.«

283 Simler, Scripta veterum, 190r: »Porro quod Iacobus Andreae in Mulbrunnensi
colloquio respondet humanitatem Christi ab ipsa conceptione habuisse potestatem et
possessionem Maiestatis qua posset ubique praesens esse, verum illa non esse usum, sed
in uno loco fuisse localiter, id ad nostram defensionem nobis sufficit, quod scilicet
naturae non separentur etiamsi humana Christi natura in uno solo loco sit, divina
nihilominus ubique: ac recte inde Heidelbergenses argumentati sunt.« Cf. Protocollum
hoc est, Acta Colloquii inter Palatinos et Wirtebergicos Theologos, de Ubiquitate sive
Omnipraesentia corporis Christi […], Heidelberg: Michael Schirat, 1566 (VD 16 B
7854f.), 28, 86–94, 102, 133f., 136.
284 Simler, Scripta veterum, 189v.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

147

ting a twofold worship of Christ, as both the divine Word and the
man Jesus indwelt by divinity.285

Simler goes further, seeking to turn the accusation of Nestori-
anism back on to the ubiquitarians themselves. The posturing of
Brenz and his followers, »who cast themselves as the sole defen-
ders of the majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ«, is compared to the
arrogance of Nestorius, who boasted of having recovered the true
doctrine of Christ.286 The writings of the Fathers against mono-
physitism provide Simler with further ammunition. Justinian, Vi-
gilius, Gelasius and Maxentius accuse those who speak of two
natures before, though not after, the union of imitating Nestorius,
as their position implies the existence of a separate human hypo-
stasis of Christ prior to the incarnation. Taking his cue from these
writers, Simler highlights Nestorian-sounding passages in Brenz’s
works in which the latter speaks of the son of Mary as filled with
the Son of God or of the Son of God as assuming the son of
Mary.287 In the same way, Andreae is criticised for teaching that
the man Jesus is called God »not because he is God in himself, but
because in taking on his flesh [God] gave this man all power in
heaven and on earth, and endowed him with all knowledge, and
communicated to him every gift of the holy spirit«.288 In Simler’s
view, this is to posit two persons in Christ, subject, as in Nestorius,
to a twofold worship.289 Worse still, by asserting the deification of
Christ’s humanity through its assumption of divine properties, the
ubiquitarians give succour to the Samosatenians of Transylvania,

285 Simler, Scripta veterum, 188r.
286 Simler, Scripta veterum, 173v: »Ac [Nestorius] se magnifice iactat, quemadmo-
dum nostra quidem aetate quidam se solos Maiestatis Domini nostri Iesu Christi vin-
dices esse asserunt«.

287 Simler, Scripta veterum, 190r. Cf. Johannes Brenz, Recognitio propheticae et
apostolicae de vera maiestate Domini nostri Iesu Christi […], Tübingen: Ulrich Morhart
the Elder, 1564 (VD 16 B 7785), 40f. Beza cites the same passages, to make a similar
point, in his preface to Christoph Hardesheim’s »Refutatio dogmatis de fictitia carnis
Christi omnipraesentia« (CTB 12, 66f. [no. 828]).

288 Simler, Scripta veterum, 190v: »Iacobus Andreae non tantum eadem cum suo
Brentio asserit, sed docet etiam Christum hominem dici Deum non quia sit Deus in ipso,
sed quia in assumptione carnis dedit huic homini omnem potestatem in coelo et in terra,
et ornavit eum omni scientia, et communicavit ei omnia dona spiritus sancti.«

289 Simler, Scripta veterum, 190v. The point is reiterated in Simler, De vera praesen-

tia, 88r, 96r–97r, 98r.

148

Mark Taplin

who ascribe to Christ a derivative divinity on account of his mi-
raculous conception and the power and spiritual gifts bestowed on
him by God.290 Andreae’s attempts to make the hypostatic union
dependent on the transfusion of divine attributes to the man Jesus
threaten either to undermine the distinction of persons within the
Trinity or to turn Christ into »a deified man, adorned with divine
gifts, which comes close to the impiety of the Samosatenians«.291
There is an element of polemical point-scoring in Simler’s claim
to have detected a Nestorianising strand in the Christology of the
ubiquitarians, but he is on surer ground when seeking evidence of
monophysitism in their works. In the final chapter of the Narratio,
the doctrine of ubiquity is assimilated to the teachings of the »fa-
natic« Schwenckfeld and his followers, already identified as the
prime representatives of contemporary Eutychianism. Simler is not
blind to the differences between the two groups. He accepts that,
unlike Schwenckfeld, Brenz and Andreae acknowledge the crea-
tureliness of Christ’s flesh, and credits them with greater subtlety
than the Silesian reformer. For example, they accept that the com-
municatio idiomatum is to be understood »personaliter«, rather

290 Simler, Scripta veterum, 191r: »Velim autem hunc alterum ubiquitatis episcopum
[Andreae], quem a Samosatenicis furoribus quos Blandrata et Franciscus Davidis in
Hungaria spargunt, alienum esse arbitror, bene secum expendere, quantam eorum cau-
sae roboris et firmamenti suppeditet: si enim creata natura in sese donari potest ea
gloria et maiestate divina, ut exaequetur creatori et sit in sese adoranda, habent illi
magnam ianuam apertam ad sua dogmata stabilienda. Docent autem Christum unius
tantum esse naturae, hominem conceptum ex spiritu sancto et natum ex Maria virgine,
esse autem hunc hominem Deum, tum propter conceptum e spiritu sancto, tum propter
dona spiritus sancti sine mensura, et potestatem a Deo concessam.«

291 Simler, Scripta veterum, 191r–v: »Urgeant autem quantum velint communicati-
onem proprietatum et essentialem perfectionem non aliam unionem statuere hinc po-
terunt quam quae hominem Christum personam aliam a Verbo faciat, et Deum non
natura sed ex gratia, proprietates enim illae essentiales tribus personis Trinitatis ex
aequo communes sunt, et earum communicatio est opus totius Trinitatis, opera enim
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa: etsi igitur filius haec habet aeterna generatione, et ita
sapiens est genita sapientia, tamen cum communicantur hae proprietates creaturae non
communicantur eo modo quo filius habet, quo differt non re sed modo habendi (ut in
rebus divinis habendi verbo improprie utamur) sed realiter ut adversarii dicuntur trans-
funduntur, cum autem reipsa eadem sit patris et filii et spiritus sancti sapientia et po-
tentia, et communicatio quoque opus ad extra commune sit tribus personis, non potest
unio personalis in hac communione aut transfusione constitutui, nisi dicamus Trinitati
unitum esse hominem Christum, vel statuamus eum esse hominem divinis donis orna-
tum et Deificatum quod accedit ad Samosatenianorum impietatem.«

Josias Simler and the Fathers

149

than »essentialiter et naturaliter«, a position compatible with
Chalcedon. Yet their central argument – that the divine attributes,
especially ubiquity, are assumed by the man Jesus – can only lead
to a »Eutychian« confusion of Christ’s two natures. The Württem-
bergers may pay lip service to orthodoxy but, like Schwenckfeld
and Eutyches, who made similar claims, they must be judged on
their writings. Simler highlights statements in which the »Brenti-
ani« appear to teach both the passibility of Christ’s divine nature
and the incorporation of his humanity into the Godhead. On
Christ’s ascension, the location of his glorified body in heaven and
his second coming, ubiquitarian teaching is clearly refuted by the
Fathers, whose writings offer the correct perspective on contem-
porary Christological debates. Moreover, in attempting to recon-
cile their peculiar dogmas with formal adherence to Chalcedonian
orthodoxy, the ubiquitarians have arrived at a position that is ho-
pelessly incoherent and self-contradictory. Thus they concede that
Christ’s humanity must be circumscribed »in itself«, but seek to
rescue the doctrine of ubiquity by claiming that the Saviour’s glo-
rified body is made omnipresent in a hitherto unheard-of manner,
the modum maiestatis.292 Simler’s trump card is the former Lu-
theran hero Philip Melanchthon, now posthumously appropriated
for the Reformed cause, »who states clearly that this physical com-
munication of idioms is nothing other than a confusion of natu-
res«.293

6. Conclusion

In the Scripta veterum, the full range of Simler’s intellectual inter-
ests is on display, from theology and textual commentary through
to history, biography and bibliography. The volume recapitulates

292 Simler, Scripta veterum, 211v–212r.
293 Simler, Scripta veterum, 210v: »Philippus Melanchthon, cuius sanctis laboribus
multum debet universa Germania, diserte testatur hanc Physicam communionem Idi-
omatum, nihil aliud esse quam naturarum confusionem.« Cf. Bullinger, Responsio, 69v.
For Melanchthon’s opposition to ubiquitarian Christology, see Irene Dingel, Melan-
chthon und die Normierung des Bekenntnisses, in: Der Theologe Melanchthon, ed.
Günter Frank, Stuttgart 2000 (Melanchthon-Schriften der Stadt Bretten 5), 195–211
(209–211).

150

Mark Taplin

themes from his earlier controversial writings, targeted primarily
against antitrinitarianism, and anticipates his subsequent detailed
refutation of the Lutheran doctrine of Christ, De vera praesentia,
in which he made considerable use of the texts anthologised in the
Scripta veterum. The tension between scholarly and polemical con-
cerns that manifests itself in the work is reflective of the hybrid
nature of Simler’s role, as both a humanist-trained academic and a
public representative of the Zurich church, tasked with defending
Zwinglian doctrine against its enemies. Throughout his career,
Simler’s scholarship was interwoven with polemic against the Ca-
tholic, Lutheran, antitrinitarian, Schwenckfeldian and Anabaptist
alternatives to Reformed Protestantism. In the Scripta veterum, his
aim is at once to demonstrate the unanimity of the Fathers, as
witnesses to the Christological teaching of the early church, and to
establish the Reformed as their legitimate successors. Evidence of
apparent disagreement – between Cyril and the Antiochenes, or
between the eastern and western theological traditions – is smo-
othed over or explained away, in order to preserve intact the il-
lusion of a consensus patrum consistent with Reformed orthod-
oxy. The volume testifies to the deep attachment of the Zurich
reformers to what they regarded as authentic Christian tradition
(as distinct from the subsequent »innovations« of the papacy) and
their rejection of the apostolic primitivism favoured by some ra-
dicals. Whereas the positions of the Zurich church’s opponents are
discredited by association with the Nestorian and monophysite
heresies, the Reformed are placed in a clear line of descent from
the Fathers, whose efforts in defence of the orthodox faith provide
the inspiration for Simler’s own anti-heretical campaign.

Josias Simler and the Fathers

151

Appendix

Johannes Pontisella to Josias Simler

Chur, 3 September 1571
Zurich ZB Ms. F 61, 7

[Address:] Clarissimo viro Domino Iosiae Simlero, Tiguri Sacra-
rum literarum professori celeberrimo, Domino suo honorando,
perpetuaque fide colendo.

S.P.D. Ego quidem facile ad credendum inducor (vir Clarissime)
Ebionis, Cerinthi, et aliorum haereticorum rabiem, furiarumque in
impiis dogmatibus ululatum, primitivae illi Ecclesiae, triste admo-
dum, et luctuosum fuisse spectaculum, cum videlicet illi, qui Apos-
tolos ipsos doctores habuissent, coacti fuerint videre, et auribus
percipere, simplicem de Dei filio doctrinam, foede corrumpi, mi-
sereque dilacerari. At procul dubio, divina providentia ita ordinan-
te, satanica illa organa, eo potissimum tempore, rabiem et virus
suum evomuere, quo adhuc superstes esset is, qui impuris istis ho-
minibus os execratum et blasphemum obdurare, et Domini nostri
Iesu Christi divinitatem assere [sic] posset, videlicet S. Iohannes
Evangelista et Apostolus: qui aliquando in filii Dei pectore recu-
buerat, et Spiritum eius largiter hauserat: ita ut miseros homines in
errorem inductos, facile in viam rectam reducere, et in pura fide
confirmare, retinereque posset. Opus insuper praestantissimum,
Evangelium videlicet Sacrosanctum ab ipso Iohanne posteris relic-
tum, quo ipso tanquam validissimo scuto, ad venenata spicula, a`
Satana, in Iesu Christi divinitatem emissa, excipere valerent. Certe
Ignatius et Polycarpus, S. Iohannis discipuli, et horum auditor Ire-
naeus, hunc clypeum arripuit, adversus haereticos ex Satanae cas-
tris prodeuntes, et Christi Domini naturam appetentes, pugnatu-
rus. Insequentibus deinde temporibus cum Satan, pro suo ingenio,
alias atque alias machinas, ad Iesu Christi naturas oppugnandas
pararet, Optimi, Maximique Dei beneficio, extiterunt et complures
alii, qui modo dictorum vestigiis insistentes acriter puram et syn-
ceram de Dei filio doctrinam sunt tutati, quos tu in hoc tuo opere
(vir Clarissime) producis ac commemoras. At quam dulce, quam-
que iucundum est, eiusmodi praecellentium virorum, in purioris

152

Mark Taplin

fidei defensione, consensum videre? Equidem ego hunc tuum co-
natum et laborem, quo maxime strenuos haeresium oppugnatores,
unico opere coniunxisti, omnibus quibus modo animus nulla ma-
levolentia fuerit suffusus, facile probatum iri speraverim. Ex hoc
enim opere cuivis facile erit, solida et perspicua desumere argu-
menta, quibus blasphemorum ora ita obstruat, ut ne mutire qui-
dem amplius valeant. Haud igitur immerito opus hoc tuum
haereticorum malleus dici poterit. Mihi quidem hoc donum gratis-
simum extitit, tibique (Vir Clarissime) pro hoc munere gratias ma-
ximas et ago, et habeo, habiturusque sum perpetuo. Et Amplissi-
mus vir D. Stephanus Willius, Cons. dignissimus, gratias ingentes
suo nomine tibi agere iussit, se relaturum quoque, sicubi occasio
sese obtulerit, pollicetur. Christum Dominum aeterni Dei filium
rogamus, ut is te Ecclesiae suae quam diutissimum salvum et in-
columem servare dignetur. Amplissimus D. Cons. salutem pluri-
mam suo nomine adscribere iussit. Meo quoque nomine Clarissi-
mos viros D.D. Bullingerum, Gualtherum, Lavatherum et alios no-
tos salutare digneris. Bene valeas, vir Clarissime, meque in tuorum
numero habere digneris.

Curiae Rhaetorum 3 Non. Septemb. Anno 71.
Iohannes Pontisella Senior tui observantissimus.

Mark Taplin, PhD, Edinburgh

Abstract: During the 1560s and early 1570s, Josias Simler established himself as one of
Zurich’s foremost theologians and intellectuals. Simler was known to contemporaries
not just as an erudite defender of orthodox Reformed teaching, especially against anti-
trinitarianism and other forms of religious radicalism, but as an accomplished humanist
scholar. Both aspects of his activity are on display in the Scripta veterum latina, a
volume of patristic texts published in August 1571. In this work, which includes a
detailed account of Christological disputes during the fifth, sixth and seventh centuries,
Simler follows the practice of Heinrich Bullinger and other Zurich writers in using
church history to demonstrate the orthodoxy and catholicity of Reformed doctrine and
to discredit the teachings of its Lutheran, Catholic and radical opponents. While ac-
knowledging differences in emphasis in the works of the church Fathers, he argues for
an overall consensus patrum on Christological matters that is in harmony with the
position of the Zurich church.

Keywords: Josias Simler, Heinrich Bullinger, patristics, church history, Christology,
Johannes Brenz, Francesco Stancaro, Nestorianism, Cyril of Alexandria, Theodoret,
monophysitism, Kaspar Schwenckfeld

