Z W I N G L I A NA 

BEITRÄGE  ZUR  GESCHICHTE  ZWINGLIS 

DER  REFORMATION  UND  DES  PROTESTANTISMUS 

IN  DER  SCHWEIZ 

HERAUSGEGEBEN  VOM  ZWINGLIVEREIN 

1972  / NR. 2 

BAND  XIII  / HEFT  8 

The  Institutionalization 

of  the  Reformation  at  Zürich 

by  R O B E ET  C.  W A L T ON 

The  institutionalization  of  the  Reformation  at  Zürich  saw  the  com-
pletion  of  the  institutionalization  of  the  city  magistracy's  authority  over 
all  aspects  of  the  external  affairs  of  the  church.  In  this  sense  the  Refor(cid:173)
mation  marks  the  end  rather  than  the  beginning  of  the  process.  In  order 
to  understand  the  significance  of  the  authority  which  the  success  of  the 
Reformation 
to  the  civil magistracy,  it is also  necessary 
to  understand  the  context  within  which  the  magistracy  functioned  and 
which  conditioned  the  form  and  extent  of  the  city  government's  claims 
to  authority  but  never  to  sovereignty  in  the  modern  sense1. 

finallyguaranteed 

Zürich,  a  former  imperial  city  and  thus  a  fragment  of the  Holy  Roman 
Empire,  had  been  a  member  of the  Swiss Confederacy  since  1351. She  was 
the  heir  to  a  long  tradition  of republican  freedom  which  drew its  strength 
both  from  the  origins  of  the  Confederacy  itself  in  the  struggle  against  the 
Habsburgs  and  a  progressive  internal  broadening  of  the  franchise  to  the 
benefit  of  the  artisan  guilds  and  at  the  expense  of  the  landed  gentry  and 
merchant  classes.  On  the  eve  of  the  Reformation  the  city's  Constitution 
represented  the  form  of  guild-dominated  city  State  which  has  been 

1  Bernd Moeller, Zwingiis Disputationen.  Studien  zu den Anfängen  der Kirchen(cid:173)
bildung und des Synodalwesens im Protestantismus, Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung 
für Rechtsgeschichte, KA, LXXXVII,  1970,277,286,288,290,299-300,317,319-320. 
Cf.  Rene Hauswirth, Zur politischen Ethik der Generation nach Zwingli, Zwingliana 
XIII,  Heft  5,  1971, 305-306. 

497 

described  most  carefully  by  Eberhard  Naujoks  and  Bernd  Moeller. 
Zürich  like  most  other  South  German  cities  thought  of  itself  as  a  small 
scale  corpus  christianum,  or  res publica 

christiana2. 

The  city State  was a part  of the fragmented  political  and  religious  world 
which  in  fact  characterized  late  Medieval  Society  north  of  the  Alps  as 
much  as  it  did  the  world  of  the  Renaissance  republics  of  Italy.  As  a 
member  of  the  "agglomeration  of  particular  communities3",  which  made 
up  the  Swiss  Confederacy,  Zürich,  whose  economic  and  political  fortunes 
were  in  decline,  sought  to  defend  its  traditions  of  civic  freedom.  The 
Zürich  reformer,  Ulrich  Zwingli,  never  tired  of  warning  the  Confederates 
to  guard  themselves  from  "foreign  lords"  who  would  bring  them  to  dis-
honor4. 

In  speaking  of  the  church  Zwingli  employed  an  Augustinian  dualism 
which  made  it  possible  for  the  "external  structure  of  the  church  to 
conform  to  the  fragmented  structure  of  political  reality5".  His  answer 
given  in  April  of  1522  to  the  Suffragan  Bishop  of  Constance's  warning 
t h at  the Zürich  magistrates  should  not  depart  from  the  church  outside  of 
which  there  was  no  salvation  emphasizes  this  dualism.  Zwingli  agreed 
that  no  one was saved  outside  the  church  which  was  made  up  of  all  those 
who  confessed  with  their  hearts  and  their  mouths  t h at  Christ  was  the 
risen  Lord.  The  members  of  this  church  he  added  might  be  among  the 

2  Bernd  Moeller,  Reichsstadt  und  Reformation,  Schriften  des Vereins für  Reforma(cid:173)
tionsgeschichte,  Nr. 180 (Gütersloh,  Gütersloher  Verlagshaus  Gerd  Mohn,  1962),  15. 
Eberhard  Naujoks,  Obrigkeitsgedanke,  Zunftverfassung 
und  Reformation,  Veröffent(cid:173)
lichungen  der Kommission für  Geschichtliche  Landeskunde  in  Baden-Württemberg, 
Reihe  B,  Bd.  3  (Stuttgart,  W.Kohlhammer,  1958), 11. 

3  Cf.  W. J. Bouwsma's  description  of  the  world  in  which  the  Italian  republics 
sought  to  maintain  themselves  and  the  outlook  which  their  struggle  produced. 
W. J. Bouwsma,  Venice  and  the Defense  of  Republican  Liberty  (Berkeley,  University 
of California  Press,  1968) 8,  13. The  position  of the  Italian  cities and  their  ideological 
response  to  it  should  be  examined  comparatively  in  the  wider  perspective  of  the 
transalpine  city  and  territorial  states  of  the  late  Medieval  period. 

4  Huldreich  Zwingiis  Sämtliche  Werke,  hg. von  Emil  Egli  und  Georg  Finster,  14 
Bde.  (Berlin,  C.A.Schwetschke  und  Sohn,  1905ff.),  I,  157,  I8812-13  (hereafter  re-
ferred  to as Z). Martin  Haas, Huldrych  Zwingli  (Zürich, Zwingli Verlag,  1969), 63-67, 
72-75. 

5  Bouwsma,  30.  The  above  quote  is  from  Bouwsma  who  applied  it  to  the  "re-
publicans  of the  Renaissance"  in  the  Italian  city  states  but  it  has  equal  application 
to  Zwingli's  Zürich.  Cf.  Perplexae  quippe  sunt  istae  duae  civitates  in  hoc  saeculo, 
invicemque  permixtae,  donec  ultimo  judicio  dirimantur...,  S. Augustini 
Aurelii, 
Opera  Omnia,  Tomus  Septimus,  De  Civitate  Dei,  ed. J.P.Migne,  Patrologiae  Cursus 
Completus  (Parisiis,  Pres  La  Barriere  D'Enfer,  1846), vol.  XLI,  lib. I,  cap.  XXXV, 
46i6-i8  (referred  to  as  De  Civitate  Dei). 

498 

Indians  or  the  Scythians6.  Article  eight  of  the  Defense  of  the  Sixty-Seven 
Articles,  published  in  July  of  1523,  made  t he  twofold  distinction  even 
clearer. Zwingli  repeated  what  he  had  said  earlier  about  the  nature  of  the 
universal  church  whose  members  included  " . ..  aller  dero,  die  in  einem 
glouben  uff  den  Herrn  Jhesum  Christum  erbuwen  und  ggründt  sind  ... 
das ist:  die  gemeinsame  aller  usserwelten  gleubigen7."  To  this  he  added  a 
discussion  of  the  second  way  in  which  the  word  church  had  been  used  to 
refer  to  particular  gatherings  which  he  said  were  called parishes  or  church 
congregations.  He  assured  his  readers  that  Paul  had  often  referred  to 
parishes  as  "ecclesias" 
t h at  is  assemblies  (or  communities).  To  prove  his 
point  he  cited  l.Cor.  1:2,  translating  Paul's  greeting  to  the  church  at 
Corinth  as  "Der  Gemeind,  die  in  Corintho  ist8". 

lay  with 

the 

impudent  sinners 

At  the  opening  of  the  Second  Disputation  in  October  1523  Zwingli 
again referred  to  1. Cor.  1:2  to  assert  that  Paul's  letters to  the  churches  at 
Corinth  and  Galatia,  which  he  said  were  addressed  to  the  "gemeinden 
oder  kilchhörinen  an  dennen  orten",  provided  the  precedent  for  refering 
to  the  congregation  at  Bern  or  Zürich  in  the  same  way.  On  the  basis  of 
this  argument  he  claimed  that  the  responsibility  for  admonishing  and 
exoommunicating 
individual  church 
because  the  universal  church  could  never  be  gathered  together9.  The  aim 
of this  argument  was  to  validate  the  authority  of  those  assembled  for  the 
Disputation  to  deal  with  such  questions  as  the  Mass  and  the  Images. 
Zwingli  maintained  the  same  basic  position  in  the  Fidei  Ratio  of  July 
1530. The universal  church  of the  elect  was known  only to God; the  visible 
church  was  made  up  of  all  who  confessed  Christ,  and  although  it  con-
tained  many  reprobi,  it  was  called  the  church  of  God  by  the  "judgement 
of  m e n"  on  the  basis  of  a  mere  external  Standard.  Because  this  church 
could  not  be  gathered  together  in  one  place Zwingli  said  as  he  had  before 
t h at  the  term  church  was  also  applied  to  particular  gatherings  of  Chris(cid:173)
tians  such  as  the  church  at  Rome  or  Augsburg  or  Lyon.  The  unity  of  the 
visible  church  was  the  result  of  sharing  the  same  spirit  which  led  it  to  a 
common  confession  of  faith1 0. 

It  is interesting  to  note  in  this  connection,  t h at  Thomas  Erastus  made 
use  of  exactly  the  same  distinctions  in  the  first  five  articles  of  his  Expo-
sitio,  as  did  John  Calvin  when  he  said  "plurimi sunt  permixti  hypocritae, 
qui  nihil  Christi  habent  praeter  titulum  et  speciem  . . ."  and  juxtaposed 

e Z I,  152i2_16. 
? Z II, 56is, so. 
8 Z II,  5823. 
9 Z II,  682i9_28. Cf. Moeller,  Zwinglis  Disputationen,  317-321. 
io Z  VI/II,  800i6-i8,  8OI17-19,  21-24,  30,  8028. 

499 

the  church  universal  based  upon  God's  secret  election  to  the  church 
visible  whose  members  were  considered  elect  by  "quoddam  charitatis 
iudicium11".  Calvin  expressed  his views very  clearly  on the  need  for  the 
"outward  discipline  and  ceremonies"  of  the  church  to  suit  the  require-
ments  of  the time and place in which it  found itself when he said, "... con-
fugere  hie  oportet  ad  generales  quas  dedit  regulas,  ut  ad  eas  exigantur 
quaeeunque  ad  ordinem  et  decorum  praeeipi  necessitas  Ecclesiae  postu-
labit12".  This opinion  left  him  and  his followers  ample room  to  adapt  to 
and  take  advantage  of  a  constantly  changing  world13.  Both  Calvin  and 
Zwingli like their  republican  equivalents  beyond  the  Alps believed  that: 
. . .  minime  negaverim  vel  aristoeratiam,  vel  temperatum  ex  ipsa  et 
politia  statum  aliis  omnibus  longe  excellere:  . . . Facit  ergo  hominum 
vitium  vel  defectur,  ut  tutius  sit  ac  magis  tolerabile  plures  tenere 
gubernacula,  . . .  ac  siquis  plus  aequo  se  efferat,  plures  sint  ad  cohi-
bendam  euis libidinem  censores  ac magistri.  Id  cum  experimento  ipso 
semper  fuit  comprobatum,  tum  sua  quoque  authoritate  Dominus 
confirmavit  quum  aristoeratiam  politiae vicinam apud Israelitas  insti-
tuit,  quum  optima  conditione  eas habere  vellet  . . ,14 
To Zwingli spiritual freedom,  which was freedom  of conscience  brought 
by  Christ  via  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel, was best  defended  and  main-
tained  in  a  Commonwealth  which  enjoyed  temporal  freedom,  that  is 
freedom  from  dependence  upon  a king or prince. It  is interesting  to  note 
in  this  respect that Zwingli, following  St. Augustine's  defmition  of  a  true 
republic  found  in  Bk  XIX,  Chapter  21 of the  City  of  God, termed  those 
aristoeratie  or  mixed  forms  of  governments  which  did  not  aeeept  the 
preaching  of the  Gospel oligarchies15. Zwingli believed  that  true  citizen-
ship, which  to  him  implied  the  existence  of  civic  freedom,  was inextrica-

11  Johannis  Calvini  Opera  Selecta,  eds. P.Barth,  G.Niesei,  5 vols., editio  seeunda 
(Monachii, in Aedibus Chr. Kaiser,  MCMLXII); vol. 5  (Institutionis  Christianae  reli-
gionis  1559  librum  IV,  continens),  cap.  I,  sec.  7i9-2i;  817  (hereafter  referred  to  as 
Institutionis). 

12  Institutionis, 

lib. IV,  cap.  X, seo. 3O32-35. Kressner  completely  misunderstands 

Calvin's  flexibility  in  such  matters  and  Claims  that  Calvin  made  the  Kirchenver(cid:173)
fassung,  an  article  of  faith.  He  confuses  Calvin  with  Calvinists  such  as  Cartwright 
who  were  closer  to  Beza's  views  than  Calvin's.  H. Kressner,  Schweizer  Ursprünge 
des  anglikanischen  Staatskirchentums, 
Schriften  des  Vereins  für  Reformationsge(cid:173)
schichte,  Nr. 170  (Gütersloh, C.Bertelsmann  Verlag,  1953), 74-76.  Institutionis, 
lib. 
IV,  cap. I,  sec. 9;  cap.  X,  sec. 27-30;  cap.  X I,  sec.  1-5;  cap.  X I I,  sec.  1-13. 

13  Bouwsma,  27-29. 
14  Institutionis, 

der  Eidgenossenschaft 
1970),  56-57.  Z  XIV,  l l u - 2 1. 

lib. IV,  cap.  X X,  sec. 8,  47823 -4796.  E.Kobelt,  Die  Bedeutung 

für  Huldrych  Zwingli 

(Zürich,  Buchdruckerei  Leemann  AG, 

15  Kobelt,  56-57. 

500 

bly  bound  up  with  proper  piety1 6.  Paraphrasing  part  two  of  Chapter 21, 
Bk  X IX  of  the  City  of  God,  he  based  the  very  consensus,  on  which  he 
believed 
the  harmonious  functioning  of  a  mixed  Constitution  was 
founded,  upon  such  piety  as  his  introduction  to  Jeremiah  reveals. 

Sunt  enim  urbes  nihil  aliud  quam  magnae  societates,  Aristotele 
quoque  teste.  Publicus  ergo  consensus,  qui  ad  omne  corpus  est  neces-
sarius,  quomodo  ex  tarn  diversis  ingeniis  coibit,  nisi  uno  spiritu 
membra  vegetentur,  nisi  eadem  doceantur,  .  . . 

Compare  here  Augustine  speaking  of  men  or  an  assembly  of  men  who  do 
not  serve  God:  "Non  est  hie  ergo  juris  ille  consensus,  qui  hominum 
multitudinem  populum  facit,  cujus  res  dicitur  esse  respublica1 7."  The 
stark  Augustinianism  of  Zwingli's  argument  as  well  as  t h at  of  his  sub-
sequent  discussion  of  true  justice  is  most  striking.  For  Zwingli  this 
Instruction  by  one  spirit  was rooted  in  ille  noster  Christianismus.  Through 
the proper preaching  of the  Gospel which  was the  source of true  Christian -
ity, Zwingli, like St. Augustine,  believed  t h at  an  awareness  of the  common 
good  and  a  civic harmony  based  upon  the  right  of each  man  to reeeive  his 
due  could  be  achieved.  Zwingli  clarified  this  point  in  the  introduction  to 
his  commentary  on  Jeremiah  when  he  warned  t h at  without  divine  aid 
men  could  obtain  neither  wisdom  nor  prudence.  Without  God  all  t h at 
was  possible  was  what  we  would  call  pork  barrel  agreements  and  the 
pursuit  of  disruptive  selfish  ends  by  class  or  interest  groups 
(nundinatio 
et factio)18.  The  just  government  which  resulted  in  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  provided  the  context  in  which  the  Citizen  could  enjoy  civic  free-
dom.  This  assumption  led  Zwingli  to  the  conclusion  which  he  stated  at 
the  end  of  his  introduction  to  Jeremiah. 

turgent 

Sic  prineipes  vestri  non 
fastu,  sie  prophetai  commode, 
fideliter  ac  erudite  docent,  sie  plebs  tranquilla  et  doctrinam  et  impe-
rium  capit,  ut  iam  dixisse  olim  non  poeniteat  Christianum  hominem 
nihil  aliud  esse  quam  fidelem  ac  bonum  civem,  urbem  Christianam 
nihil  quam  ecclesiam  Christianam  esse1 9. 

«  Kobelt,  62-63. 
"Z  XIV,  41935-420i.  De  Givitate  Dei, 

lib. 19,  cap. XXI,  pars  229-si.  Cf. 
J.D.Adams,  The  Populus  of Augustine  and Jerome, A  Study  in  the Patristic Sense 
of Community  (New  Haven,  Yale  University  Press,  1971),  17-21,  130ff. 

«  Cf. Z I,  30838-3095. Kobelt,  70. Z XIV,  41720-2a. 
19 Z XIV,  424i7_22. The  identifleation  of the  church  and  the  city is  reminiscent 
of Erasmus'  identifleation  of the  civitas with  a  monastary:  "quid  aluid  est  civitas 
quam  magnum  monastarium ?"  In  his  letter  to  Paul  Volz  Erasmus  developed  a 
criticism  of monks  and  monasticism  which  eompared  the  monks  unfavorably  with 
the  Citizens  of  a  civitas and  oonoluded  that  a  comparison  of  a  good  monk  with  a 

501 

Basic  to  Zwingli's  identification  of  the  church  with  the  city  is  not  only 
the  assumption  t h at  the  church  is  a  mixed  body  and  hence  subject  to  the 
same  law  in  the  civitas  terrena  but  also  a  belief  t h at  t he  preaching  of  the 
Gospel makes  possible a piety  which  is shared  by  all. Thus  the  hierarchical 
distinctions  implicit  in  the  medieval  view  of  the  role  of  laymen,  the 
secular  clergy  and  the  religious  were  swept  away  so  t h at  true  citizenship 
grounded  in  piety  could  be  enjoyed  by  all2 0. 

On  the  practical  level  Zwingli's  position  represented  the  logical  conse-
quences  of  the  absorption  of  the  local  church  into  the  body  politic  of  the 
Zürich  Commonwealth  which  had  been  going  on  for  almost  two  centuries 
before  the  Reformation.  Bishop  Optatus  of  Mileve's  (4th  Century)  often 
employed  phrase  "Res  publica  non  est  in  ecclesia  sed  ecclesia  est  in  re 
publica"  was  increasingly  the  case  in  Zürich2 1. 

The  extent  to  which  the  church  and  civic  Commonwealth  were  identi-
fied  in  this  period  is  revealed  by  fact  t h at  by  the  beginning  of  the  16th 
Century  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  separate  a  Pfarrgemeinde 
from  a 
Dorfgemeinde 
in  the  countryside  and  t h at  the  very  definition  of  the  term 
Kirchgemeinde  had  begun  to  change.  Increasingly  the  term  came  to  refer 
to  a  biannual  assembly  of  all  those  living  in  a  Community  or  region  who 
gathered to deal with ecclesiastical and political matters2 2. Additional proof 

good  layman  would  be  decided  in  favor  of  the  layman.  "Sin  bonos  cum  bonis, 
minimum  est  discrimen,  si  tarnen  est  ullum,  nisi  quod  religiosiores  videntur,  qui 
minus  coaeti  praestant  religionem."  Opus  Epistularum  des Erasmi  Roterdamni,  12 
vols., ed. P.S. and H.M.Alien  (Oxonii,  In  Typographeo  Clarendoniano,  MCMXIII) 
I II  858, 11, 560. The parallel  between  Erasmus'  conclusion  and that  of  Lorenzo 
Valla's  De professione  religiosorum  is worthy  of note.  Charles  Trinkaus,  Humanist 
Treatises  on the Status  of the  Religious:  Petrareh,  Salutati,  Valla,  Studies  in the 
Renaissance,  vol.  X I,  36-38.  Zwingli's  optimism  about  the  influenoe  which  the 
preaching  of the Gospel  would  have  upon  the life  of  Zurich's  Citizens  was in  part 
formed  by  the  influenoe  of  Erasmus.  It  represents  the  transalpine  equivalent  of 
what  Bouwsma  describes as the pragmatic  dogmatically  indifferent  " Pauline-Augu-
stinian  spirituality"  which  he  terms  "later  medieval  evangelism".  Bouwsma  29, 
40-41.  Cf. also  Haas,  Huldrych  Zwingli,  87-90.  However,  it is questionable  whether 
a  Pauline-Augustinian  spirituality  could  be  dogmatically  indifferent. 

20  Cf. Bouwsma,  6 ff. 
21  Hans  Morf,  Obrigkeit  und Kirche  in  Zürich  bis zu  Beginn  der  Reformation, 
Zwingliana  X I I I,  Heft  3, 1970,  164-205. The quote  as cited  in  0.Brunner,  Souve(cid:173)
ränitätsproblem  und Sozialstruktur in den deutschen  Reichsstädten  der frühen  Neu(cid:173)
zeit,  Neue  Wege  der  Verfassungs-  und  Sozialgeschichte  (Göttingen,  Vandenhoeck  & 
Ruprecht,  1968), 307. Cf. also M.Heckel,  Staat  und Kirche  nach  den Lehren  der evan(cid:173)
gelischen  Juristen  Deutschlands 
Jus  Ecclesiasticum 

in  der  ersten  Hälfte  des  17. Jahrhunderts,  vol. 6 of 

(München,  Claudius  Verlag,  1968),  llöff. 

22  Schweizerisches  Idiotikon,  13 Bde., eds. P.Staub,  L.Tobler,  R.Schoch  (Frauen(cid:173)
feld,  Verlag  J.Huber,  1885ff.),  I I,  1577-1578.  Carl  S.Bader,  Studien  zur  Rechts-

502 

is given in Zwingli's use and identification of such terms as gemeind and volck 
to refer to the church, for these terms were identical with those used to refer 
to  the  civic  Community.  Their  recognized  Latin  equivalents  were  civitas 
or res publica for gemeind and populus  for volck. Populus  could refer  either 
to  the  governed  or  the  governed  together  with  magistracy  and  Zwingli 
used populus  interchangeably with civitas and res publica. All three terms 
assumed that the magistrates as well as the governed lived together under 
the  same  law23. 

It  should  come as no surprise  that  when Thomas Erastus  spoke of  the 
twofold  nature of church he spoke of the  church in the world as  "externa 
seu  visibilis,  ac  politica24".  The  significance  of  such  an  identification  of 
the  ecclesiastical  and  civic  Community  is  probably  best  revealed  in 
Zwingli's letter to Ambrosius Blarer in which he defended  a city Council's 
right  to  supervise  religious  affairs  in  so far  as it  was  Christian  and  con-
sulted the various district assemblies of the city, the curiata comitia which 
he  said  were  called  the  guilds  in  order  to  obtain  the  consensus  of  the 
church25. Zwingli  completely  identified  the visible  church  with  the  guild 
Constitution  of the Zürich city state. The identification  further  limits  and 
clarifies  his  use  of  the  term  populus;  the  Citizens, the populus,  were  the 
members of the guilds who were the politically  competent  element in  the 
city  state.  In  fact  the  great  Council  (200), whose members were  referred 
to as the Citizens "die  Bürger"  and in which the guilds predominated  was 
a  body  whose members  served  for  life  and  were  coopted26.  This  identifi-

geschichte des Mittelalterlichen  Dorfes,  Dorfgenossenschaft  und  Dorfgemeinde  (Weimar, 
Böhlaus  Nachfolger,  1962),  Teil  2,  194-195,  212-213. 

ra Kobelt,  24-26.  Z  I I,  55-58.  Cf.  Leo  Jud's  use  of  the  term  "Gemeinde"  for 
res publica  christiana  and  "Bürger"  for  cives in his translation  of Erasmus'  Education 
of  a  Christian  Prince.  Otto  Herding,  Die  deutsche  Gestalt  der  Institutio  Principis 
Christiani  des  Erasmus,  Adel  und  Kirche:  Gerd  Tellenbach  zum  6'S.Geburtstag,  hg. 
von  Josef  Pleckenstein  und  Karl  Schmid  (Freiburg/Basel/Wien,  Herder  Verlag, 
1968),  545-546,  546^548. 

24  " E st  autem  duplex  fidelium  societas,  interne  scilicet  ac  spiritualis,  et  externa 
seu  visibilis,  ac  politica",  T. Erastus,  Explicatio  Gravissimae  Quaestionis  utrum  Ex-
communicatio 

(Pesclavii,  Apud  Boacium  Sultaceterum,  CIOIOLXXXIX),  1. 

25  Z  I X,  45627^586,  13-15. Fritz  Blanke,  Zwingli  mit  Ambrosius  Blarer  im  Ge(cid:173)

spräch,  Ambrosius  Blarer,  hg.  von  B.Moeller  (Constanz/Stuttgart,  J an  Thorbecke, 
1964), 85.  It  should  be  added  that  the  Volksanfrage  provided  the same sense of  con(cid:173)
sensus  for  the  country  districts. The  extent  to  which  consensus  played  a role in  both 
the  city  and  the  countryside  is  sometimes  overlooked. 
26  Martin  Haas, Zwingli  und  der Erste  Kappelerkrieg 

(Zürich, Verlag  Berichthaus, 
1965),  8.  Hans  Morf,  Zunftverfassung  und  Obrigkeit  in  Zürich  von  Waldmann  bis 
Zwingli, Mitteilungen  der Antiquarischen  Gesellschaft  in Zürich,  Bd. 45, Heft  1 (Zürich, 
Leemann  AG,  1969), 43. Bouwsma  notes  the  same  use  of  the  term  populus  in  " R e-

503 

cation  is  what  set  Zurioh's  ecclesiastical  polity  apart  from  Geneva's. 
Neither  Zwingli  nor  Bullinger  accepted  Calvin's  belief  that:  "Quemad-
modum  enim  nulla  urbs  nullusve  pagus  sine  magistratu  et  politia  stare 
potest:  sie  Ecclesia  Dei  . . . sua  quadam  spirituali  politia  indiget:  quae 
tarnen a civili prorsus distineta est,  . . .2 7" Calvin and Beza's call for  the 
"truly  godly magistrate"  to  join  in  the  "common  subjeetion  of  God's 
children to prevent the corruption of a whole society" and Beza's  remark 
when commenting on Matth.  18:17, "He that  contemneth the  judgement 
of the church, contemneth  God" were viewed by Bullinger as the  demand 
for  a new form of papal tyranny which was to be enforced by  exeommuni-
cation, i.e. barring from  the communion28. Writing a few years before his 
death,  Bullinger  asserted  that  Zürich  had  never  had  a  Presbytery  and 
neither  he  nor  anyone  eise  in  the  city  wanted  a  diseipline  beyond  that 
which was acceptable to the law of the Christian magistrate  and  could be 
administered  by  him. 

naissance  discourse"  to  refer  to  the  "politically  competent  group  in  a  state"  and 
Brunner  eonfirms  its applioation in the North  German  cities during the  early  modern 
period.  Bouwsma,  15.  Brunner,  Souveränitätsproblem  und  Sozialstruktur,  302. 
Zwingli's  reassuring  letter  to  Beatus  Rhenanus,  written  in  March  of  1519,  which 
informed  Rhenanus  that  his  audience  was  drawn  from  the  best  (optima)  should 
also be read  in  this  context.  Similar  terms  such  as  meliores  were  used  to  refer  to  the 
more  influential  Citizens in  Nuremberg  and  elsewhere.  Z VII,  I7I20. Gerald  Strauss, 
Nuremberg  in  the Sixteenth  Century  (Bloomington,  University  of Indiana,  1962), 78. 
Moeller,  Reichsstadt  und  Reformation,  11. It  is also interesting  to note that  in  Geneva 
until  1560  only  those  members  of  the  Council  of  200  who  were  "citoyens  et  bour-
geois", i.e. those  who  had  been  born  in  the  city,  could  be  elected  to  the  Consistory. 
The  term  bourgeois  referred  to  those  who  had  either  purchased  or  been  granted 
citizenship  when  they  came  to  Geneva.  "Citoyens  et  bourgeois"  meant  native  born 
Genevans.  I  wish  to  thank  Professor  Robert  Kingdon  for  making  me  aware  of  this 
distinetion.  W.Baum,  Edward  Cunitz,  Edward  Reuss,  eds.,  Joannis  Calvini  Opera 
Quae  Supersunt  Omnia  (Brunsvigae,  Apud  C. A.Schwetschke  et  Pilium,  1879),  vol. 
X X I,  727-728.  In  any  discussion  of  urban  constitutions  Brunner's  basic  deflnition 
of  the  Bürgergemeinde  should  be  kept  in  mind.  "Konstitutiv  aber  war  der  Bürger(cid:173)
eid,  denn  auf  ihm  beruht  die Möglichkeit  eigener  Rechtssetzung  durch  eidliche  Ver(cid:173)
pflichtung,  durch  sogenannte  'Wilkür'  ['Köre'],  und  auf  ihm  beruht  das  Verhältnis 
von  Treue  und  Gehorsam  gegenüber  dem  R at  als  Obrigkeit,  ein  Verhältnis,  das  nur 
im  Rahmen  des  geltenden  Rechts  wirksam  war."  Brunner,  Souveränitätsproblem 
und  Sozialstruktur,  302. 

27  Institutionis, 
28  Institutionis, 

lib. IV,  cap.  X I,  sec.  le-io-
lib. IV,  cap.  X I,  sec.  1—4.  Cf.  Calvin's  remark:  " . ..  quia  nee 
quiequam  sibi  sumit  Eeclesia  quod  sit  proprium  magistratus,  neque  hoc  efficere 
potest  magistratus  quod  ab  Ecclesia  peragitur."  Institutionis, 
lib. IV,  cap. X I, sec. 
3,  9-12.  The  New  Testament  of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  translated  out  of  Oreek  by 
Theodore  Beza,  Whereunto  are Adjoyned  Large  Expositions  of Phrases  and  Hard  Places 
by the Author  and  Others,  Englished  by  L.Tomson  (London,  Deputies  of  Christopher 

504 

For  the  sake  of  maintaining  the  unity  of  the  Community,  he,  like 
Erastus,  opposed  barring  anyone  from  the  Lord's  Supper  and  viewed 
excommunication  as a temporal punishment  which feil naturally into  the 
realm of competence of the Christian  magistrate. As it had in his polemic 
against  the  Anabaptists,  Augustine's  Third  Book  Against  the  Letter  of 
Parmenian  played  a  central  part  in  Bullinger's  argument29. 

Calvin's  Consistory  at  Geneva  was  the  result  of  a  compromise  with  a 
city  government  whose  real  independance  was  of  recent  origins  and 
represents a thwarted  attempt  to establish a separate government for  the 
church,  while  such  organs  as  the  Zürich  Ehegericht (1525)  or  the  Synod 
of  1528 represent  institutions  founded  by  the  authority  of  a  long  estab-
lished  Christian  magistracy  for  the  proper  government  of  a  res publica 
christiana.  Köhler's  attempt  to  relate  the  Zürich  Ehegericht to  the  Con(cid:173)
sistory and his deseription  of both  as typically  "Reformed"  because  they 
represent  a unique mixture  of lay  and  clerical elements  misses the  point 
that  the  two  institutions  are  the  product  of  two  different 
theories 
concerning the relationship between the spiritual and secular realms in the 
civitas  terrena; the  Genevan  Consistory  was  not  the  final  product  of  a 
series  of attempts  first  begun  with  the  founding  of the Zurieh Ehegericht 

6s  Ghristiano  Presbyterio 

Barker  Printer  to  the  Queen's  most  excellent  Maiestie,  1596), 22a. Theodore  Beza, 
Tractatus  Pius  et  Moderatus  de  Vera  Excommunicatione 
(Geneva,  Apud  Joannem  le  Preux,  MDXC),  the  Preface.  Cf.  Bullinger's  letter  to 
P. Dathenus,  J u ne  1,  1570.  "Neque  habuimus  unquam  presbyterium,  vel  talem 
senatum  ecclesiasticum,  qui examinaverit  communicaturos, ad  eommunionem  admi-
serit,  aut  ab  ea  excluserit  peccatores  . . . Erastus'  Explicato,  355 ff.  Cf. also the  letter 
to  Bishop  Sandys,  written  March  10,  1574:  " . ..  Propositionem  primam,  civilem 
magistratum  nulluni  habere  jus  in  res  ecclesiasticas;  item  seeundam,  eeelesiam 
nullam  admittere  gubernationem  quam  presbyterorum  vel  presbyterii;  duas,  in-
quam,  has  communes  habent  cum  papistis,  qui  et  ipsi  magistratum  a  gubernatione 
ecclesiae  deturbant,  et  se  ipsos  solos  substituunt."  Zürich  Letters,  sec. Series,  ed. 
H.Robinson  (Cambridge,  University  Press,  MDCCCXLV),  from  the  Latin  Letters, 
Epistulae  Tigurinae, 
appended  at  the  end  of  the  English  text,  p.  148.  Cf.  also 
Kressner,  Schweizer  Ursprünge  des  anglikanischen  Staatskirchentums, 
95-98.  Kress-
ner's  use  of  the  term  " P u r i t a n"  is  ambigious  for  Sandys  himself  was  a  Puritan, 
if the  term  is used  to  designate  those  who  wished  for  a  further  reform  of the  church 
from  within.  Cf.  Patrick  Collinson,  The  Elizabethan  Puritan  Movement 
Jonathan  Cape,  1967),  61-65. 

(London, 

29  Bullinger  to  Erastus,  October  17,  1568, Expositio,  350-351:  " . ..  quibus  nun-
quam  concedere  voluimus,  ut  disciplinam,  et  coenam  commiscerent.  Coenam  esse 
publicam  et  laetam  gratiarum  actionem  et  non  poenam.  Disciplinam  vero  com-
prehendere  monitionem,  correptionem,  adeoque  poenam.  Coherceri  debere  scelera 
et  sceleratos  per  magistratum  Christianum  . . ."  Bullinger  to  Erastus,  October  29, 
1568,  Expositio,  352.  Bullinger  to  Peter  Dathenus,  June  1,  1570,  Expositio,  356, 
358-359. 

505 

in  1525  to  link  the  magistracy  and  the  church  together  in  an  institution 
which  was  neither  purely  ecclesiastical  nor  purely  governmental8 0.  Cal-
vin's Consistory  was  the  first  step towards jure  divino  presbyterianism,  in 
Bullinger's  eyes  a  true  via  oligarchiae;  Zwingli's  Ehegericht  was  the  final 
step in  the  absorption  of the  institutions  of the  local  church  into  the  civic 
Commonwealth.  The  first  secretary  of  the  court,  Heinrich  Utinger,  had 
been  the  Bishop's  resident  commissioner  for  dealing  with  marriage 
questions  in  the  city  since  1502,  when  the  Council  had  compelled  the 
Bishop  of  Constance  to  dismiss  Peter  Nümagen  and  appoint  Utinger3 1. 
The  Zürich  Councils  were  indeed,  as  Zwingli  remarked  in  a  letter  to 
Ambrosius  Blarer  dated  October  9,  1523,  "the  highest  authority  among 
us3 2".  B ut  the  position  of the  Councils  and  the  fact,  for  instance  t h at  the 
Council  of 200  controlled  the  appointments  to  all the  prebends  in  the  city 
and  had  forced  the  Council  of  50  to  share  its  rights  to  the  appointments 
of  the  city's  three  ecclesiastical  foundations,  the  Abbey,  the  Priory  and 
St. Peters  at  Embrach,  before  the  Reformation  began  do  not  teil  the 
whole  story3 3.  The  surprisingly  smooth  transition  from  the  allegiance  to 
the  old  church  to  ecclesiastical  independence  was  due  to  the  stability  of 
Zurich's  governing  establishment  and  to Zwingli's  close  alliance  with  key 
families  within  the  ruling  class. The  introduction  of  the  Reformation  was 
accompanied  by  a  minimum  of  friction  because  it  did  not  mask  or  serve 
to  aid  in  the  rise  of  a  group  of  novi  homines.  The  balance  of  power  in  the 
city  had  shifted  to  the  guilds  by  1498  and  by  the  time  Zwingli  appeared 
on  the  scene  the  leading  families  among  the  Zürich  guildmasters  were 
closely  allied  by  marriage,  interest  and  style  of  life  with  the  aristocratic 
Constaffel.  W h at  did  happen  during  the  first  decade  of  the  Reformation 

30  Walther  Köhler,  Zürcher  Ehegericht  und  Genfer  Konsistorium,  Bd.  I I,  Quellen 
und Abhandlungen zur Schweizerischen Reformationsgeschichte,  X  (Leipzig, M. Hein-
sius  Nachfolger,  1932),  653-654,  662-663.  The  case  of  Bremen  offers  an  interesting 
parallel  to  that  of  Zürich.  Though  Christoph  Pezel  viewed  the  "discipline"  as  one 
of  the  "signs"  of  the  church,  the  jurisdictio  ecclesiastica  which  he  championed  was 
not  maintained  there.  Jürgen  Moltmann,  Christoph  Pezel  (1539-1604)  und  der  Cal(cid:173)
in  Bremen,  vol. 2 of the  Hospitium  Ecclesiae,  Forschungen  zur  bremischen 
vinismus 
Kirchengeschichte  (Bremen,  Verlag  Einkehr,  1958). I I I,  155-158,  159-163,  165. 

31  Hans  Morf,  Obrigkeit  und  Kirche  in  Zürich  bis  zu  Beginn  der  Reformation, 

Zwingliana  X I I I,  Heft  3,  1970,  177-178. 

32  Z V I I I,  1244-9. Cf.  Haas, Zwingli  und  der  Erste  Kappelerkrieg,  7-11. Cf.  Brun-
ner's  definition:  "Die  Stadt,  die  Civitas,  die  Bürgergemeinde,  die  Universitas  ist 
Inhaber  der  'Rechte  und  Freiheiten',  der  'Jura  et  libertates'.  Es  fehlt  der  moderne 
Begriff  der  Staatsgewalt  . . . ' Bürgermeister,  R at  und  Gemeinde'  bilden  zusammen 
die  Gesamtheit."  Brunner,  Souveränitätsproblem  und  Sozialstruktur,  303. 

33  Morf, Zunftverfassung  und  Obrigkeit  in Zürich  von  Waldmann  bis Zwingli,  43-44. 

506 

was the  logical  consequence  of the  social amalgamation  which  had  already 
taken  place.  It  should  also  be  added  t h at  the  general  decline  of  Zurich's 
prosperity  caused  a  leveling  of  a  wealth  which  probably  made 
the 
amalgamation  easier34. 

The  obvious  domination  of  the  affairs  of  the  city  by  the  Constaffel  and 
the  Guild  of  the  Dyers  (Zunft  zur  Saffran)  and  the  Innkeepers  (Zunft  zur 
Meisen),  whose  members  more  frequently  had  the  money  to take  the  time 
for  civic  affairs,  was  somewhat  modified  in  favor  of  increasing  participa-
tion  by  a  wider  circle of already  prominent  and  wealthy  members  of  the 
remaining  guilds.  T h at  is  political  participation  was  more  evenly  shared 
within  the  establishment  itself.  This  change  can  be  traced  through  an 
examination  of  the  membership  of  the  special  commissions 
(Ratsverord(cid:173)
neten)  appointed  by the  Mayor  and  the  three  Chiefguildmasters  to  suggest 
Solutions  to  the  administrative,  fmancial,  diplomatic  and  religious  Prob(cid:173)
lems  which  faced  the  Zürich  Council  before  and  during  the  Reformation 
period3 5. 

W h at  needs  to  be  examined  further  and  can  not  be  considered  in  this 
paper  is  the  role  of  the  Freundschaft,  which  can  be  translated  into  Latin 

34  Haas, Huldrych  Zwingli,  72-75. 
35  Morf's  recent  thesis  along  with  Walter  Jaoob's  Politische  Führungsschicht  und 
in  Zürich  1519-1528,  vol. 1  of the 
Reformation;  Untersuchungen  zur  Reformation 
Zürcher  Beiträge  zur  Reformationsgeschichte 
(Zürich,  Zwingli  Verlag,  1970),  have 
completely  set  aside  the  Interpretation  which  assumed  the  emergence  of  a  new 
ruling  class  offered  by  Birnbaum  in  his  The  Zwinglian  Reformation  in  Zürich, 
Archives  de  Sociologie  des  Eeligions,  vol. IV,  15-30.  For  instance  the  balance  of 
power  had  already  begun  to  shift  against  the  pro  French  mercenary  party  and 
even  against  mercenary  Service  as a  whole  by  1515/16.  Morf,  Zunftverfassung  und 
Obrigkeit  in  Zürich  von  Waldmann  bis Zwingli,  72-76,  10-11.  Jacob,  44-45,  59,  63, 
67,  69. Jacob  notes  that  the  Rentner  class  which  was heavily  represented  in the 
Constaffel  and tended  to  be loyal  to the old faith  did lose  their  political  influence 
but  they  were  only  a  small  element  within  the  establishment  which  had  already 
taken  form  before  the  Reformation  began.  Ninety  percent  of those  who aided  in 
guiding  the Reformation  to a  successful  conclusion  in Zürich  were  from  the  group 
which  normally  dominated  the civic  affairs  of the Commonwealth.  Only  nine men 
rose  more  rapidly  because  of  their  allegiance  to  the  Reformation  and  only  three 
new men  appear  solely on the grounds  of their  adherence to the Reformation.  Jacob, 
68-69,  82-83,  100. The key to the shift  in participation  in favor  of a broader  spec-
trum  of the Zunftoberschicht  was the influence  exercised  by the  Bürgermeister  and 
the  4  Obristmeister  who were  among  Zwingli's  more  ardent  supporters  in  choosing 
the  members  (Verordneten)  of the  commissions.  Jacob,  82-83.  Naujoks  describes 
a  similar  development  in Ulm  during the latter  half of the  15th  Century. The  average 
guildmember  could  not afford  to hold  office.  Continuity  and stability  in the  affairs 
of the  government  were  provided  by a Zunftaristokratie.  Naujoks,  Obrigkeitsgedanke, 
Zunftverfassung  und  Reformation,  19 ff. 

507 

as  sodalitas, 
in  the  Zürich  Reformation.  Martin  Haas  has  recently  em-
phasized  its  importance  both  for  an  understanding  of  the  government  of 
the  country  districts  during  the  Reformation  and  the  response  of  the 
Zürich  Council to  the  threat  of the  Täufer.  The  commitment  of a  leading 
family,  i.e.  one  of  the potentiores  to  the  cause  of  the  Reformation  usually 
meant  the  commitment  of the  whole Freundschaft, 
the amici.  The  Freund(cid:173)
schaft  was  an  association  providing  social  and  legal  protection  which 
began  with  the  extended  family  and  went  far  beyond  it  to  cut  across 
society  vertically.  It  would  not  take  the  commitment  of  too  many 
leading  families  to  oblige  a  large  segment  of  the  non-voting  population 
both  in  the  city  and  its  environs  to  support  the  Reformation3 6. 

The  socio-political  position  of the  Council in  the Zürich  Commonwealth 
had  practical  results.  The  nature  of  the  proposals  suggested  by  Zwingli 
and  Bullinger  for  the  appointment  of  the  clergy  within  the  Canton 
provides  an  excellent  example  of what  these results were. The  suggestions 
represented  part  of  a  larger  set  of  proposals  for  the  establishment  of  a 
Cantonal  synod  which  were  first  advanced  by  Zwingli  in  1528  and  given 
final  form  in  the  plan  presented  by  Bullinger  and  accepted  by 
the 
Council  on  October  22,  1532.  Zwingli's  proposal  made  provision  for  the 
establishment  of  a  Committee  of  Examiners  or  Triers 
(Examinatoren-
Konvent)  which  included  members  of  the  Council  of  50,  who  were  to 
examine  the  candidates  for  appointment  to  vacant  parishes.  Basic  to  the 
Committee's  willingness  to  consider  a  candidate  was  whether  or  not  the 
candidate  was  willing  not  only  to  swear  obedience  to  the  authority  of 
Scripture  and  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation,  but  also  to  the  magis-
tracy3 7.  When  the  Council, aided by  Bullinger,  revised  and  elaborated  the 
structure  of  the  Synod,  the  new  synodical  Charter  was  issued  "uss 
ordentlicher  oberkeits  macht  bekräftigt",  i.e.  on  the  strength  of  the 
government's  general  authority  to  encourage  "a  godly  Christian  life" 
("ouch zuo üfnung und pflanzung eines göttlichen,christenlichen  lebens3 8"). 
The  new  ordinance  strictly  limited  the  Synod's  competence  to  matters 
of  doctrine  and  to  questions  arising  from  the  behaviour  of  the  clergy.  All 
other  "external"  matters  were  to  be  referred  to  the  Council  by  the  eight 

36 Lorenz  Diefenbach,  Glossarium Latino-Germanicum Mediae et Infimae  Aetates 
(Darmstadt,  Wissenschaftliche  Buchgesellschaft,  1968;  reprint  of  1857  edition). 
Martin  Haas, Täufertum  und  Revolution,  Festgabe Leonhard von Muralt  (Zürich, 
Verlag  Berichthaus,  1970),  293-295;  Otto  Brunner,  Land  und  Herrschaft  (Darm(cid:173)
stadt,  Wissenschaftliche  Buchgesellschaft,  1970), 22, 17-24. 

3' Z VI/I, 527, 530. 
38 Emil Egli, Actensammlung zur Geschichte der Zürcher Reformation in den Jahren 

1519-1532 (Zürich, Druck  von  J.Schabelitz,  1879),  1899, 826. 

508 

representatives  of the  Small  Council  who  were required  to  be present  at 
the  biannual  meetings  of  the  Synod.  The  method  of  appointment  out-
lined  in  the  ordinance  is  of  particular  interest.  This  section  began  by 
stating  that  appointments  to  vacant  parishes  lay  in  the  hands  either  of 
the  local feudatory  (lehenherrn), or  "our noble lords"  (unseren  gnädigen 
herren). Candidates were to present their credentials to the Committee of 
Triers which  was  to  consist  of two pastors, two members of the  Council 
and two of the Biblical lectures  (lectores), who were usually employed  at 
the Carolinum, i. e. the school whichhad been formedfrom  the income and 
buildings  formerly  belonging  to  the  Canons  of  the  Grossmünster.  The 
Examiners  were  to  pass  their  report  on  to  the  Council  which  were  to 
consider it  and then  call the new appointee before them for  a closer look. 
The  appointment  in  fact  followed  from  the  swearing  of  the  oath  of 
loyalty  to  the  Council and  was to  occur  in  the  following  way.  Escorted 
either  by  a  member  of  the  Council,  or  the  local  Vogt  (provost),  the 
candidate was to be brought to his new parish  where he would  be met  by 
the  Deacon  (Dean)  of  the  chapter  and  the  pastor  from  the  nearest 
neighboring parish. (The ordinance divided the parishes of the Canton into 
eight chapters subsequently nine, each of which was headed by a Deacon.) 
After  the  people  had  been  assembled,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that 
here  there  is no  reference  to  a  church  congregation  but  merely  to  "das 
volk versammlet",  the representative  of the magistracy was to declare  the 
parish  open  and  to  ask if  anyone  objected  to  the  candidate. After  a  ser-
mon  by  the  deacon  on  the  duties  of the  pastor,  the  candidate  was to  be 
formally presented to the church  (Mich),  a prayer for grace to be said and 
then  the  Vogt,  or  the  representative  of  the  Council,  was to  recommend 
the  candidate  to  the  congregation  (gemeind)  in  the name  of the christli(cid:173)
chen oberkeit and  to  enjoin  them  to  aid  him  in  the  exercise  of his  office. 
Objections to the pastor's conduct were to be reported to the government 
who  were  to  be  responsible  for  disciplining  the  pastor.  If  the  candidate 
had  not  already  sworn his oath  of doctrinal  obedience before  the  Synod, 
he was to  do  so at  the  next  meeting39. 

When  the  English  Bishops  appealed  to  Bullinger  for  help  against 
Thomas  Cartwright,  Bullinger,  who was old and  unwell,  shifted  some of 
the  bürden  of  the  response  to  Rudolph  Gualther,  who  was  to  be  his 
successor  as  the  Zürich  Antistes.  Gualther  himself  was  a  typical  profilic 
proponent  of the Zürich urban  theology who believed in the need for  the 
Christian  magistrate  and  denied  that  the  res publica  could  be  governed 
without  the  proper  practice  of religion  and  knowledge of the  divine will. 

39 Egli, 1899, Articles 8 and 9, p. 828-829. 

509 

To  him  those  who  denied  that  the  care  of the  church  and  religion  was  the 
concern  of  the  magistrate  were  "publicos  humani  generis  hostes4 0". 
Gualther  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Cox,  the  Bishop  of  Ely,  on  August  26, 
1573,  which  dealt  in  detail  with  the  demands  of  the  Presbyterians.  His 
reply  to  their  insistance  t h at  the  pastor  be  chosen  by  the  congregation 
reveals  how  completely  the  Zürich  divines  thought  in  terms  of  the  civic 
Constitution  of  their  own  city.  While  admitting  that  there  were  Biblical 
and  patristic  precedents  for  such  a  mode  of  selection,  Gualther  added 
t h at  he  was  sure  that  only  the  more  infiuential  element  of  the  congrega(cid:173)
tion  (potior  es partes)  had  actually  voted.  He  defined  the potior es partes  as 
those  "qui  vel  apostoli  nominis  dignitate  vel  officii  ratione  et  honorum 
praerogativa  alliis  praestabant".  Without 
them  and  some  kind  of 
hierarchical  order  among  the  clergy,  he  asserted  the  decent  and  orderly 
selection  of  pastors  enjoined  by  St. Paul  would  not  have  been  possible41. 
Then  he  directed  his  attention  to  the  present  Situation.  The  universus 
ecclesiae  ordo had  been  subverted  by  papal  tyranny  and  confirmed  by  the 
"regum  et  principum  superstitio"  with  the  result  t h at  tithes  and  other 
parish  revenues  as  well  as  the  right  of  election,  the  patronatus, 
had 
devolved  upon  "ad  collegiorum  praefectos,  episcopos  et  abbates,  denique 
ad  mulieres  quoque  abbatissas",  not  to  mention  others.  In  the  case  of 
Zürich  many  such  rights  along  with  the  incomes  of  the  prebends  which 
Gualther  said  included  "reditus  maximos"  in  the  Canton  were  vested  in 
the  Bishop  of  Constance  and  "abbates  papisticos".  It  was  he  claimed  too 
dangerous  to  deprive  them  of  these  rights  and  so  they  were  allowed  to 
enjoy  them  as  long  as  they  promised  "amplissimo  senatu  nostro"  not  to 
appoint  anyone  who  was  not  of  "nostra  ecclesia"  and  who  had  not  been 
properly  examined4 2.  Gualther  noted  further  t h at  the  St.Peter's  Church, 
where  he  had  been  chosen  and  ordained,  was  the  only  church  in  the 
entire  Canton  which  still had  the right  elect its own  minister  and  said  t h at 
he  saw no  reason  to  look  down  on  the  rest  of the  clergy,  because  they  had 
not  been  chosen  in  this  way.  His  argument  was  simply  t h at  one  had  to 
accept  the  Situation  as  it  was,  especially  since  it  could  not  be  altered 
" . ..  non  absque  tumultu  et  publico  periculo.  Ferenda  potius  esse  puta-
mus,  quae  pie  et absque  salutis aeternae  jactura  ferri  possunt,  mutari  au-
tem  absque  turba  et periculo  non possunt4 3".  I t w as  his  opinion  t h at  the 

40  Rudolph  Gualther,  In  Acta  Apostolorum  per  Divum  Lucem  descripta,  Homiliae 

GLXXV 

(Tiguri,  In  Officina  Froschoviana,  Anno  MDLXXXVI),  2-3. 

41 Zürich  Letters,  seo. Series,  229;  Epistolae  Tigurinae,  140. 
42 Zürich  Letters,  sec. Series,  230-231;  Epistolae  Tigurinae,  141. 
43 Zürich  Letters,  sec. Series,  231;  Epistolae  Tigurinae,  141.  The  Solution  of  the 

510 

English should do the same. If nothing eise, Gualther's advice reveals the 
limits  within  which  the  Reformation  was  carried  out  at  Zürich  and  the 
absolutely central position of the  "senate" in making the religious reform 
possible. Gualther's remarks also reflect  the spirit of the  Erfüllungspolitik 
which Zürich persued  after  the disaster  of the  second Kappel  war44. 

What  is remarkable  is that  despite Zurich's  eventual accomodation  to 
Calvinist  theology, the  structure  of  the Zürich  church  was never  chang-
ed;  the  "somnia"  of  those  whom  Gualther  had  feared  might  want  to 
"novam  nobis  Ecclesiae  formam  obtrudunt"  were  not  realized.  This is 
revealed  in  the  inscription  on  the  silver  cups  presented  to  Antistes 
Johann  Jacob  Breitinger  on the  21 May,  1619, upon  his return  from  the 
Synod  of Dort. At  Dort  he had  played  an important  part  in framing  the 
statement  of  the  doctrine  of  double  predestination  as de  fide  Calvinist 
doctrine  and  had  defended  the  memory  of  Henry  Bullinger  against 
charges  of  "Arminianism".  The  inscription  read:  "Duplex  robur  inest 
cathedrae,  cui  curia  nexa  est,  curiae  inest  duplex,  proxima  cui  cathedra 
est45".  The  permanence  of  the  ecclesiastical  settlement  is  even  more 
strikingly revealed in Breitinger's attempt  to  mediate  between  the  Scots 
and  Charles I  in  the  Bishop's War  by  an  appeal  to Archbishop  Laud  for 
the  sake  of  "the  Reformed  churches  truly  orthodox  and  Catholic46". 
The  attempt  had  the  support  of  the  leading  clergy  in  Bern,  Basel  and 
Schaffhausen,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Zürich  Council,  whose  secretary 
wrote the official  letters to  England,  but  it failed  because Breitinger  and 
his  friends  were  caught  between  their  doctrine  of  obedience  to  the 
Christian  magistrate  and  their  adherence  to  an  ever  more  rigidly 
defined  orthodox  doctrine.  The  civic  tradition  from  which  Breitinger 
spoke  really  had  no  satisfactory  answer  to  the  problem  of  divergence 

Bremen  City  Council  to  the  even  more  complicated  question  of  the  introduction 
of  the  "zweite  Reformation"  particularly  as  it  applied  to  the  Cathedral  might  pro-
vide  an  interesting  point  of  comparison. 

44  Cf.  Rene  Hauswirth,  Zur  politischen  Ethik  der  Generation  nach  Zwingli, 

Zwingliana  X I I I,  Heft  5,  1971, 307,  310,  314. 

45  "  . .  . similque  intelligent,  quam  viam  ipsi  quoque  in  reformandis  et  conser-
vandis  ecclesiis tenere  debeant,  nee ullis persecutionum  et  adversae  fortunae  casibus 
offendentur,  nee  illorum  somnia  admittent,  qui  novam  nobis  Ecelesiae  formam 
obtrudunt,  dum  veteribus  multa  defuisse  dieuunt,  quae,  postea  demum  a  sanotis 
patribus  constituta,  et publica  conciliorum  authoritate  reeepta  atque  stabilita  sint." 
Rudolpho  Gualtero,  In  Acta  Apostolorum  per  Divum  Lucem  descripta,  Homiliae 
CLXXV,  2-3. Hans  Rudolf  von  Grebel, Antistes  Johann  Jakob  Breitinger,  Neujahrs(cid:173)
blatt  zum  Besten  des Waisenhauses  Zürich für  1964, Nr.  127  (Zürich,  Kommissions(cid:173)
verlag  Beer  &  Co.,  1964)  36,  38. 

46  Breitinger  to  Laud,  March  21,  1639,  Staatsarchiv  Zürich,  E  I I,  369,  219,  220. 

511 

between  the  commands  of the  Christian  magistrate  and  loyalty  to  Divine 
Truth.  It  assumed  convergence  not  divergence47. 

However  this  was not  to  be  an  issue for  a  long  time  to  come. Writing  in 
the  sixth  decade  of  the  18th  Century  Johann  Jacob  Simler  discussed  the 
Constitution  of the Zürich  Church  and  praised  it  as  "die  auf  der  einen  Sei(cid:173)
ten  von  der  Hierarchie  der  Römischen  Kirche  weit  entfernet,  auf  der 
anderen  aber  dem  erweckten  Geist  der  Republicanischen  und  Christlichen 
Freyheit  am  gemässesten4 8...".  Although  he  noted  some  administrative 
improvements 
the  doctrine  and 
conduct  of  the  clergy,  which  was  introduced  in  Breitinger's  day,  Simler 
was  proud  to  say  t h at  the  structure  established  in  1532  had  remained 
virtually  unchanged  for  the  past  two  centuries49. 

including  a  greater  emphasis  upon 

Writing  two  years  before  the  collapse  of  the  old  Confederacy  in  1798 
Bürgermeister  David  Wyss  published  a  revised  edition  of  the  Politisches 
Handbuch 
He  explained  t h at  he  was  moved  to  write  because  of 

für  die  erwachsene  Jugend  der  Stadt  und  Landschaft 

Zürich™. 

.  . .  der  nachtheilige  Einfiuss 
jener  ungezähmten  Dreistigkeit,  wo(cid:173)
mit  so  viele  hirnlose,  oder  was  noch  schlimmer  ist,  halb  aufgeklärte 
Leute,  ihre  Zunge  und  Feder  mit  den  Gebrechen  aller  europäischen 
Staaten,  mit  leichtsinnigen  Tadel  ihrer  Regierungs-Massregeln,  oder 
wohl  gar  mit  zerstörenden  Verbesserungs-Plänen,  unaufhörlich  be(cid:173)
schäftigen. 

47 Staatsarchiv Zürich, E II, 369, 214-229; 239 ff. Zürich Sept. 6, 1640, Breitinger 
to Archbishop Laud: "Ad te, Beverrendissime Praesul, redimus significaturi ecquod-
nam  Tuae habuerint  apud  nos pondus. Petijt  Paternitas  Tua  a nobis,  quemadmo-
dum literas  pacificatorias  miserimus  ad  vos, ita  mitteremus  alias etiam  ad  Scotos, 
quae suadeant Regi suo obedientiam, confirraentque  Regum christianorum in causis 
ecolesiasticis potestatem esse eandem, quam exercuerint olim Reges Judaicae gentis 
optimi.  Damnemus  quoque  armatam  sub  praetextu  Religionis  Resistentiam  illam 
temporibus  primitivae  eoclesiae  inauditam.  Literas  igitur  quantoeyus  dedimus  ad 
ecolesiarum Sootiarum Ministros,  quibus ipsos de mente et Tua,  et nostra  fraterne 
candide, graviterque monuimus  . . ."  Later in the letter this statement was  carefully 
modified  to  include  the  assumption  that  the  ruler  would  maintain  a  "pure"  form 
of worship. "Veruntamen  et hoc quoque observatione non indignam  censemus, pios 
illos Judaeorum  Reges videlicet, uti nee Legis, ita nee Legalium rituum  ceremonia-
rumque inventores fuisse, sed exequutores duntaxat divini et expressi praeoepti..." 
Staatsarchiv Zürich, E II  369, 288. 

48 Joh. Jakob  Simler,  Sammlung  alter und  neuer  Urkunden  zur  Beleuchtung  der 

Kirchengeschichte  vornehmlich des Schweizerlandes  (Zürich,  bey  Orell,  Gessner  und 
Comp., 1767), 1010. 

"9 Simler, 1016. 
50 D. Wyss, Handbuch für  die erwachsene Jugend der Stadt und Landschaft Zürich 

(Zürich, bey Orell, Gessner, Füssli und Comp., 1796). 

512 

Wyss  added  that  soon  every  school  child  would  be  convinced  that  he 
knew  best  how to  improve  bis  country's  Constitution61. 

Dieses  Übel  ist  wirklich  von  so  ansteckender  Natur,  dass  bald  jeder 
Schulknabe  bestimmt  zu  wissen  wähnt,  wie  die  Verfassung  seines 
Vaterlandes  besser  einzurichten,  und  ganze  Nationen  zu  beglücken 
wären  . . ,52 

His intention was to defend  the Swiss Constitution  as it was as the source 
of  Swiss  prosperity  and  to  warn  against  those  who  wished  to  rob  them 
of their  heritage. 

Zürich provided  him with the perfect  example of the role of religion in 
society  which  he dealt  with  in  detail  in part  six. Wyss's  account  reveals 
the  drift  towards  the  development  of  a  territorial  State  in  the  modern 
sense  but  it  confirms  Otto  Brunner's  claim  that  the  old  conceptions  of 
society  and  government  survived  in  many  of  the  city  states  up  to  and 
even  beyond  the  period  of  the  French  Revolution53.  Wyss  began  by 
stressing  the  great  advantages  the  Zürichers  enjoyed  as  a  result  of  the 
Zwinglian  Reformation  and  spoke  with  pride  of  the  government  super -
vision of public worship which included  the assignment  of worshippers  to 
church  congregations  and  setting  the  time  at  which  the  Services were  to 
be  held.  An  additional  advantage  was  that  no  other  form  of  public 
worship was tolerated  in the  Canton  which  he did  admit  was due  "mehr 
aus politischen  als moralischen  Gründen54". 

A  discussion  of  the  support  and  appointment  of  the  clergy,  whom  he 
said were essential for the well-being of society, followed  and reveals  that 
the same procedures which had been established in  1532 were still  inusein 
1796 under  the  supervision  of the  Small  Council.  It  also  shows  that  the 
incomes and right  of appointment  (Kirchen-Patronat)  to many  prebends 
still  remained  in  the  hands  of  "fremde  Fürsten  oder  Gotteshäuser"  as 
they had in Gualther's day  . Wyss placed considerable emphasis upon  the 
clergy's  oath  of  loyalty  to  the  magistracy  which  he noted  was  the  pre-
requisite  for  appointment  to  a  living  and  then  went  on  to  consider  the 
oath  which  the  magistrates  took  to  defend  the  church  whith  their  for-
tune  and  life.  From  this  discussion  he  led  the  reader  on  into  a  general 
review  of  the  nature  citizenship.  Those  who  abandoned  their  faith,  or 
married  a  Catholic  who  did  not  convert  to  Protestantism  lost  their 
citizenship  and  "were  viewed  in  every  way  as  foreigners".  These  "for-

51 Wyss, 3-4. 
52 Wyss, 12-13. 
53 Brunner, Souveränitätsproblem  und Sozialstruktur,  294-295, 319-320. 
54 Wyss, 379-380. 

513 

eigners"  could  once  again  rejoin  the  Community  and  become  Citizens  with 
civil  rights  if  they  renounced  their  apostacy  or,  in  the  case  of  those  who 
had  married  Catholics,  their  spouse  joined  the  church.  Wyss  added  t h at 
the  clergy  should  encourage  the  people  to  show  love  to  "outsiders"  who 
were  not  Protestant  and  warned  t h at  such  people  were  protected  from 
molestation  by  law. However  his discussion  made  it  clear  t h at  citizenship 
and  churchmembership  were  inextricably  bound  together5 5. 

On  the  eve  of  the  collapse  of  the  old  confederacy  the  Christian  faith 
was  still  basic  to  the  enjoyment  of  liberty  and  to  participation  in  the 
political  life  of  the  Zürich  res publica  christiana  governed  by  a  Christian 
magistracy.  The  institutionalization  of  the  Christian  Magistracy  within 
the  context  of Zurich's  Constitution,  which  was a  basic tenet  of the  urban 
theology  developed  by  Zwingli  and  his  successors,  had  survived 
the 
strains  and  stresses  of  over  two  hundred  and  fifty  years. 

55 Wyss, 388-391, 383-384. 

ZUSAMMENFASSUNG 

Die Einführung  der Reformation in Zürich ist das Endergebnis einer langjährigen 
Ausbreitung der Machtbefugnisse  der weltlichen Obrigkeit über die Kirche. In dieser 
Hinsicht  hat  die Einsetzung  der  Reformation  vielmehr  das Ende  als  den  Anfang 
einer  Entwicklung  gekennzeichnet.  Um  die  eigentliche  Wichtigkeit  der  Amtsge(cid:173)
walt  des  Rates  zu  bewerten,  muß  man  erst  den  Zusammenhang,  in  dem  der  Rat 
seine Gewalt,  nicht  aber seine Souveränität  im modernen  Sinne ausgeübt hat, ver(cid:173)
stehen. 

An der Schwelle der Reformation  ist die Verfassung  der Stadt Zürich vielen süd(cid:173)
deutschen  Reichsstädten,  in  denen  die  Zünfte  die  Oberhand  erlangt  hatten,  ähn(cid:173)
lich. Dank  der genossenschaftlichen  Staatsauffassung  hat sich das zürcherische Ge(cid:173)
meinwesen als Corpus christianum im kleineren Raum oder als res publica christiana 
betrachtet.  Die Art  des genossenschaftlichen  Selbstbewußtseins  des  Gemeinwesens 
gab  dem  Zürcher  Reformator,  Ulrich  Zwingli, den Ausgangspunkt  für  seine  Iden(cid:173)
tifizierung  der sichtbaren Kirche  mit  dem  Gemeinwesen.  Die universale Kirche, die 
«die gemeinsame aller usserwelten gleubigen » umfaßte, kannte keine Grenzen, aber 
Gemeinden, wie zum Beispiel die zürcherische, die im augustinischen Sinne corpora 
permixta  waren, waren  an  einen  bestimmten  Ort  gebunden.  Nach  der  Auffassung 
Zwingiis konnte ein echtes Gemeinwesen mit einem wahren populus (volck), welches 
aus freien  Bürgern bestand, nur  existieren, wenn das Evangelium gepredigt wurde. 
Diese Auffassung  ist  sehr von  Augustin  beeinflusst  worden und ist  auch später  bei 
Erast  wieder  aufgetaucht. 

Calvins Behauptung  über die Notwendigkeit  einer spiritualis  politiae der Kirche, 
«quae  tarnen  a  civili  prorsus  distincta  est",  hat  den  wesentlichen  Unterschied 
zwischen  seiner  Auffassung  der  Kirche  und  derjenigen  Zwingiis  gekennzeichnet. 
Das  Zürcher  Ehegericht  war  das  Endstadium  jener  Entwicklung,  welche  die Auf(cid:173)
saugung der Kirche in das zürcherische Gemeinwesen beinhaltete. Das Konsistorium 

514 

Calvins  in  Genf  ist  dagegen  der  erste  Schritt  zum  Presbyterianismus  jure  divino, 
welchen  Bullinger  als  eine  wahre  viam  oligarchiae  betrachtet  hat. 

Die  Bedeutung  der  zwei  Räte  bei  der  Einführung  der  Reformation  in  Zürich  ist 
auch  soziologisch zu erklären. Schon vor der  Reformation  hat  sich eine neue  Schicht, 
bestehend  aus  Ratsherren  der  Constaffel,  Familien  und  den  wohlhabendsten  Zunft(cid:173)
herren,  besonders  diejenigen  der  Zunft  zur  Saffran  und  der  Zunft  zur  Meisen,  ent(cid:173)
wickelt,  die  die  Stabilität  der  Stadt  auch  während  der  Reformation  gewährleistet 
hat.  Zwingli hat  seinen großen Erfolg  vor allem  durch seine Beziehungen  zu  gewissen 
Herren  dieser  Schicht  zu  verdanken.  Im  großen  und  ganzen  hat  die  Reformation 
aber  keiner  Klasse  hominum  novorum  zur  Macht  verholfen. 

Der  R at  hat  eine  Synode  für  die  reformierte  Kirche  des  Kantons,  «aus  ordent(cid:173)

licher  oberkeits  macht  bekräftigt»,  begründet  und  hat  sich  selber  das  Recht,  die 
Pfarrer  in ihre Ämter  einzusetzen, vorbehalten.  Bis zum Zusammenbruch  der  älteren 
Eidgenossenschaft  hat  der  R at  seine  Machtstelle  erfolgreich  behauptet,  und  der 
Begriff  «Bürger»  hat  zugleich  bedeutet,  daß  der  Bürger  ein  reformierter  Christ  ist. 

Robert  C.  Walton 

Robert  C. Walton,  Associate  Professor,  College  of  Liberal  Arts,  Department  of 
History,  Wayne  State  University,  Detroit/Michigan  48202 

515 

