ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 40 (2013), 113–126

Faculty Recruitment and Retention in

the Early Modern Era

The Zurich Lectorium, c. 1560–1610

Carrie Euler

In her book Teaching the Reformation: Ministers and Their Mes-
sage in Basel, Amy Nelson Burnett declares that the hiring of uni-
versity faculty at Basel between roughly 1530 and 1630 was driven
by »a mixture of parochialism, parsimony, and political influ-
ence.«1 One example she offers is the difficulty the university and
city officials faced in finding a replacement for Andreas Karlstadt,
who died suddenly of disease in 1541. Karlstadt was a refugee
from Wittenberg who had been hired based on the recommend-
ation of Heinrich Bullinger in Zurich. Yet his time in Basel had
been marred by controversy. In particular, he was often at odds
with Basel minister and professor Oswald Myconius over revisions
to the university statutes. After his death in 1541, Bullinger once
again tried to steer Basel towards hiring a foreign refugee, Peter
Martyr Vermigli, who had recently fled Italy for religious reasons
and arrived in Switzerland. As Burnett recounts, the Basel magi-
strates balked at Bullinger’s suggestion for two reasons. First, »The
potential parallels between Karlstadt and Vermigli were only too
clear, and it is unlikely that either the professors or the Senate

1 Amy Nelson Burnett, Teaching the Reformation: Ministers and their Message in

Basel, 1529–1629, Oxford 2006 (Oxford Studies in Historical Theology), 81.

114

Carrie Euler

would willingly risk hiring another outsider.«2 Second, the Senate
also liked the idea of saving money by paying the current Hebrew
professor one salary for doing two jobs, his own and that of Karl-
stadt’s. Eventually they did hire a replacement for Karlstadt, Mar-
tin Cellarius, who, Burnett explains, was not necessarily the best
candidate but was related by marriage to two Basel senators.
Hence, her statement about »parochialism, parsimony, and poli-
tical influence.«

Twenty years later a strikingly similar scenario played out in
Zurich, and the Basel faculty and Senate may have shared a laugh
at Heinrich Bullinger’s expense. Peter Martyr Vermigli – having
held positions in Strasbourg and England in the meantime – was
hired by the Zurich theological academy or Lectorium in 1556.3 By
1560, disagreements between Vermigli and long-standing Old
Testament professor Theodor Bibliander had led to controversy
and to Bibliander’s early retirement. In 1562 Vermigli died, and a
struggle ensued over his replacement.4 Bullinger and the rest of the
faculty wanted to hire another foreign scholar of international re-
nown; specifically, they suggested Jerome Zanchi, another former
Italian who was currently working in Strasbourg but looking to
move. The Zurich city council balked, however, at the prospect of
hiring another foreigner. They refused Zanchi on the grounds that
he had signed the Augsburg Confession and then passed a law
requiring citizenship for all future professors. The faculty’s sug-
gestion for a homegrown candidate – Ludwig Lavater – humbly
demurred, protesting that his Hebrew skills were not good enough.
Ultimately, Josias Simler, the other Old Testament professor, was
moved into Vermigli’s position, while Johannes Wolf, pastor of
Zurich’s second largest church (the Fraumünster), was put in Sim-
ler’s place. Wolf continued serving as pastor while also taking on
the Old Testament job.

2 Burnett, Teaching the Reformation, 82.
3 On Vermigli’s hiring, see Michael Baumann, Petrus Martyr Vermigli: Doctor, Leh-
rer der Heiligen Schrift und Zürcher. Hinweise zu Vermiglis Tätigkeit in Zürich, in:
Peter Martyr Vermigli: Humanism, Republicanism, Reformation, ed. Emidio Campi,
Geneva 2002 (Travaux d’Humanisme et Renaissance 365), 212–224.

4 Most of the evidence for this article is taken from three volumes of Acta Scho-
lastica held in the Zurich Staatsarchiv, E II 458, 459, and 466. The notes regarding
Vermigli’s replacement are found in E II 458, 32–38. Hereinafter, all references to
documents that begin E II or G I refer to documents in the Zurich Staatsarchiv.

Faculty Recruitment and Retention in the Early Modern Era

115

This incident reveals that Zurich, like Basel, was guided by par-
ochialism in its faculty hiring. The story also reveals the political
influence the city magistrates had in hiring. In terms of parsimony,
Vermigli had enjoyed relatively comfortable terms of employment –
higher than average pay and light teaching duties. It is likely that
the magistrates knew they would not have to pay a local candidate
as much as a famous foreign scholar. In order to investigate some
of these issues more thoroughly, this article surveys the faculty at
the Zurich Lectorium from the time of Vermigli’s death through
the first decade of the seventeenth century.

The Lectorium had its roots in Zwingli’s reorganization of edu-
cation in Zurich in the 1520s.5 In addition to reforming the Gross-
münster and Fraumünster Latin schools, Zwingli instituted daily
public biblical lectures in the nave of the Grossmünster. These
lectures, which were more like interactive discussions, became fa-
mous in the Reformed world; in the 1520s and 30s, they were
often attended by foreign students and guests, and the fruits of the
discussions resulted in the publication of the Zurich German Bible.
By 1560 this lively tradition of public lectures had developed into a
more formal institution of higher education. The Lectorium still
had a close relationship with the Latin schools, but it had a set
number of professors and its own classroom; lectures and exams
were given in theology, languages, and natural philosophy.6 It also
had a fairly impressive record-keeping system, which makes it a
rich subject for historians. This article is based on those records,
now housed in the cantonal archives (Staatsarchiv) of Zurich.
These archives have been known to historians of Zurich for some

5 For Zwingli’s reorganization of Zurich’s schools and the origins of the Lectorium,
see Ulrich Ernst, Geschichte des Zürcherischen Schulwesens bis gegen das Ende des
sechzehnten Jahrhunderts, Winterthur 1879; Hans Nabholz, Zürichs Höhere Schulen
von der Reformation bis zur Gründung der Universität, 1525–1833, in: Die Universität
Zürich 1833–1933 und ihre Vorläufer, ed. Ernst Gagliardi et al., Zurich 1938, 1–164;
Kurt Spillman, Zwingli und die Zürcher Schulverhältnisse, in: Zwingliana 11 (1962),
427–448; Karin Maag, Seminary or University?: The Genevan Academy and Reformed
Higher Education, 1560–1620, Aldershot 1995 (St. Andrews Studies in Reformation
History), 131–139.

6 The school is referred to (in the archives and by modern historians) using many
different names, including Pfarrerschule, Carolinum, Collegium, Schola Tigurina, and
Lectorium. I have chosen the latter because it seems to be the name used the most by
recent historians.

116

Carrie Euler

time. In the last ten to fifteen years, scholars Karin Maag and Anja
Silvia Göing have published a few short pieces looking at different
aspects of the Zurich schools.7 In 1999, a publication produced to
accompany an exhibit at the Zentralbibliothek contained brief stu-
dies of several of the scholars teaching at the school circa 1550.8
But no one, as of yet, has produced a longitudinal study of Zu-
rich’s faculty or students similar to Burnett’s in Basel, a study that
attempts to assess developments and changes over the confessional
age.9 This article offers a small start in that direction. First it will
provide an overview of the structure and recruitment of the faculty
between 1560 and 1610; second, a look at some individual faculty
members will illuminate further the kinds of men who taught at
the Lectorium; and third, examples of problems faced by the fa-
culty and the city council in maintaining a qualified teaching staff
will reveal the pressures and changes that affected institutions of
higher education in the post-Reformation era.

For most of the period in question (1560–1610), there were seven
professors appointed to teach at the Lectorium. Three were in bi-
blical theology: two Old Testament and one New. Records to-
wards the end of the century sometimes distinguish between the
two Old Testament chairs, calling one a professor of Old Testa-

7 Karin Maag, Financing Education: the Zürich Approach, 1550–1620, in: Refor-
mations Old and New: Essays on the Socio-Economic Impact of Religious Change, c.
1470–1630, ed. Beat A. Kümin, Aldershot 1996 (St. Andrews Studies in Reformation
History), 203–216; Anja-Silvia Göing, Die Zürcher Hohe Schule, 1525–1560, als Bil-
dungsinstitution, in: Zeitschrift für pädagogische Historiographie 8 (2002), 29–83; An-
ja-Silvia Göing and Hans-Ulrich Musolff, Anfänge und Grundlegungen moderner Päd-
agogik im 16. und 17. Jahrundert, Köln 2003 (Beiträge zur historischen Bildungsfor-
schung 29); Anja-Silvia Göing, Die Zürcher Schulprotokolle 1563: Spezifika einer Gat-
tung, in: Konfession, Migration und Elitenbildung: Studien zur Theologenausbildung
des 16. Jahrhunderts, eds Herman J. Selderhuis and Markus Wriedt, Leiden 2007
(Brill’s Series in Church History 31), 141–170.

8 Schola Tigurina: Die Zürcher Hohe Schule und ihre Gelehrten um 1550, ed. Hans

Ulrich Bächtold et al., Zurich 1999.

9 Ernst, Geschichte and Nabholz, Zürichs Höhere Schulen do look at Zurich’s
schools over long periods of time, but they do not fill this lacuna in the historiography
for a couple of reasons. Ernst wrote over a century ago; his work contains some errors
and does not address more recent historigraphical issues, such as confessionalization.
Nabholz wrote over seventy years ago and was mostly concerned with the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries; he offers very little analysis of the second half of the sixteenth
century.

Faculty Recruitment and Retention in the Early Modern Era

117

ment in prophetis and the other in lege, of the prophets and of the
law, but it is not clear how strictly this division was upheld.10
Initially, one of the Old Testament professors doubled as the He-
brew professor, but with the coming of Peter Martyr Vermigli in
1556 that changed, and a separate line was created for Hebrew. In
addition to the three theology positions there were three in lang-
uages: Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. (The Latin position was some-
times referred to by other names – Rhetoric, Logic, or Dialectic).
The seventh was in Physica, which meant natural philosophy and
medicine. In 1600, a new position in History was added by cre-
ating a new line. With the new school ordinance of 1609, however,
the number of professors dropped from eight to six. One of the
Old Testament positions was dropped, and the Greek and Hebrew
lines were combined into one.11

This shifting around of positions in the early seventeenth century
is significant, for it shows that the second half of the sixteenth
century was a distinct period in the history of the Zurich academy.
The faculty first took on this shape in the 1550s, as the Lectorium
grew out of its earlier more spontaneous form into a more formal
institution of higher education, and it retained this shape for fifty
years. In 1600, this stability began to break down, and with a new
school ordinance in 1609 things changed even more. The privile-
ged status that the two Old Testament positions held in this period
of stability might also be significant. The Old Testament professors
were always placed first in lists of the faculty, and, though men
were frequently promoted up from another faculty position to Old
Testament, no one ever went from Old Testament to something
else. This is intriguing, because it demonstrates that the heavy em-
phasis put on the Old Testament by theologians like Zwingli in
their theology had an impact on the organization of the school, but
that by 1600, this influence was waning. Around 1600 one also
sees an increase in the use of Latin in the school records, which, up
until this point, had been almost entirely in German. This may be
interpreted as a sign of the increasing professionalization of the
clergy. This phenomenon of the clergy becoming more of a sepa-

10 For example, see the list for the year 1592 in Catalogi Scholae Tigurinae, E II 497,

24.3. Compare with the list for 1594 in E II 459, 28.

11 Acta Scholastica, E II 459, 49; E II 466, 95.

118

Carrie Euler

rate professional group – an educated elite – has been observed
elsewhere in Europe during the age of confessionalization.12

There seems to have been two approaches to finding professors
after the 1562 law that required their citizenship. The first and
most obvious was that the city hired men already citizens of Zu-
rich, often sons of earlier professors and teachers, almost always
men who had been local preachers and pastors before (and often
during and after) becoming professors. The second solution was to
hire men from outside of Zurich – but never too far outside, usu-
ally from territories surrounding Zurich – and to grant them citi-
zenship before they assumed the position at the Lectorium. A re-
sult of both of these strategies was that, increasingly over the years,
men whose names initially appear as students in the records later
appear as faculty. The academy, whose primary function had al-
ways been to educate and train clergy for Zurich and its environs,
became a fairly insular place that also educated and trained its own
faculty.

It is important to add, however, that most of the former students
who became faculty had indeed studied outside of Zurich, thanks
to a program of travel bursaries from the city for students to study
at academies and universities abroad. As the research of Karin
Maag has demonstrated, roughly half of the students who came up
through Zurich’s Latin schools and the Lectorium spent a year or
two in places like Basel, Heidelberg, Geneva, Wittenberg, or Mar-
burg.13 The Acta Scholastica contain many references to students
abroad – who was studying where each year – and to what hap-
pened to them upon their return. When they arrived back home,
students were to provide school authorities with a thorough ac-
count of where they had been, with whom they had resided, and
what lectures they had heard. Faculty were also advised to watch
and make sure that the students had not picked up any foreign
habits or fashions while away.14 This system of foreign exchanges
is significant to the history of the Lectorium, because it allowed
Zurich students to learn from internationally-renowned faculty, to

12 Rosemary O’Day, The English Clergy: The Emergence and Consolidation of a

Profession, 1558–1642, Leicester 1979.

13 Maag, Financing Education.
14 Acta Scholastica, E II 458, 157v.

Faculty Recruitment and Retention in the Early Modern Era

119

bring ideas and training back with them, while the schools in Zu-
rich still remained relatively local and self-contained.

Individual examples of faculty at the Lectorium will help to il-
luminate the kinds of men who taught there and what their back-
grounds were. A good person to start with is Josias Simler, because
he was part of the solution to the problematic situation left by the
death of Peter Martyr Vermigli, and because he was probably the
most prolific, internationally-known scholar among the second
generation of professors. Simler was Heinrich Bullinger’s godson;
he was born in the 1520s, educated at Zurich, Basel, and Stras-
bourg.15 He became professor of the New Testament in Zurich in
the 1550s; in 1560 he moved up to one of the Old Testament
positions, working alongside Vermigli. When Vermigli died, Simler
moved to the other Old Testament position, taking Vermigli’s
place, and Johannes Wolf took the other. Simler went on to be
widely known, at least in the Germanic world, for his scholarly
works, including his magisterial survey of the Swiss republic, De
Republica Helvetiorum.

Two interesting third-generation professors were Markus Bäum-
ler and Kaspar Waser. Bäumler was born in 1555 in a small town
within the canton of Zurich. He attended the Lectorium and is
mentioned in the records as a student abroad in Tubingen in
1580.16 Before returning to Zurich, he served for about eight years
as a teacher and pastor in Germany. In 1594 he was granted Zu-
rich citizenship and brought in to be archdeacon and assistant
preacher at the Grossmünster; at the same time, he taught gram-
mar in one of the Latin schools and served a stint as Schulherr
(more about that position below). He gave up his preaching post in
1600 or 1601, however, to become a full-time professor of either
New Testament and Latin language or Greek at the Lectorium (the
manuscript records disagree on the exact year and which position);
from 1607 until his death in 1611, he was professor of Old Testa-
ment theology17 During his teaching career, Bäumler published se-

15 Much of the biographical information for faculty in this study – especially things
like birth dates that are not found in the Acta Scholastica – was taken from Emanuel
Dejung and Willy Wuhrmann, Zürcher Pfarrerbuch, 1519–1952, Zurich 1953.

16 Album in Tigurina Schola Studentium, E II 479, 58.
17 Evidence of these appointments can be found in various manuscripts: Verzeich-

120

Carrie Euler

veral German religious texts and one Latin grammar. Kaspar Wa-
ser was born in the 1560s in Zurich, educated there and at Hei-
delberg.18 From approximately 1598 to 1625, he taught Hebrew,
Greek, and finally Old Testament at the Lectorium, all the while
also serving as pastor in the nearby town of Witikon. He also
served a stint as Schulherr around 1609.19 One of his sons, Hein-
rich Waser, went on to be Burgermeister of Zurich in the seven-
teenth century.

Bäumler and Waser are good examples of how a local boy, or, in
Bäumler’s case, a nearly-local boy, could work his way through the
Zurich school system and rise to the top. Their respective careers
illustrate some interesting points about the Lectorium in this pe-
riod. First, the fact that Bäumler taught in one of the Latin schools
while also serving as Schulherr is significant, because it demon-
strates the close relationship between the Lectorium and the Latin
schools during this period. The Schulherr was the head admini-
strator and record-keeper of the schools.20 The position rotated
every two years, but not only through the professors of the Lec-
torium. As often as not, the serving Schulherr was not a professor,
but held a different position, such as teacher at one of the Latin
schools or head pastor at the Fraumünster. The Acta Scholastica,
the name for the main collection of documents used for this study,
were recorded by the Schulherr. They are essentially records of
faculty regular faculty meetings held by the faculty at all the
schools and sometimes attended by one or two city magistrates.
They contain mainly information about the faculty and students of
the Lectorium, but also a fair amount about the Latin schools.
That, combined with the common trajectory of students like
Bäumler – from student in a Latin school, to attending the »public

nisse der Inhaber von geistlichen und Schulpfründen in Stadt und Landschaft Zürich
und in Landfrieden, G I 179, 6r, 10v, 11v; Acta Scholastica, E II 459, 36r–37r, 42r,
57av.

18 For Waser as a student in Zurich and his time abroad, see Acta Scholastica, E II
458, 372br, 401r. Waser travelled extensively as a young man as the Hofmeister for J.P.
Hainzel of Degerstein (Dejung, Zürcher Pfarrerbuch, 599).

19 Acta Scholastica, E II 459, 85a r; Verzeichnisse der Inhaber, G I 179, 10v–11v.
20 There is not a perfect English translation for this title. The most obvious, »su-
perintendent,« was a title used sometimes for the head of each of the Latin schools, so I
do not want to use it here.

Faculty Recruitment and Retention in the Early Modern Era

121

lectures« for a year or two, then to study abroad, then home to
take exams and teach in the Latin school, then to a pastorate
and/or professorship – reminds us that the Zurich Lectorium was
less of an independent theological academy than just one step in a
more complex system of pastoral education and training in Zu-
rich.21

Waser, unlike Bäumler, did not give up his pastoral position in
the city when he became a professor. His career brings up the issue
of how professors were paid. In the 1520s, Zwingli established
that the faculty would be paid through the foundations of the pre-
Reformation Grossmünsterstift, or chapter. As the old canons
(Chorherren) died, faculty took over their livings; these were then
passed down, much like tenure lines today. For example, the re-
cords of 1563 indicate that Josias Simler inherited Peter Martyr
Vermigli’s living when he took over the latter’s Old Testament po-
sition.22 One of the Grossmünster livings was specifically attached
to the post of »deacon of the Silvershield.« The Silvershield was an
old house by that name located just up the street from the Gross-
münster. Since before the Reformation, this house had been the
dwelling place of one of the deacons of the Grossmünster chapter.
Around 1560, the position became associated with the academy,
and from that point forward, with the exception of two years bet-
ween 1578 and 1580, it was always held by the professor of He-
brew. Kaspar Waser was deacon of the Silvershield and raised his
family at the house in the early seventeenth century.23

The story behind the two years in which the deacon of the Sil-
vershield was not the Hebrew professor reveals how the Zurich
faculty and magistrates did sometimes run into difficulties finding
and paying faculty for each of the seven professor lines. One rea-
son seems to be that a professorship in the Lectorium was not
considered all that desirable or prestigious compared to pastoral
positions in Zurich’s churches. In this specific case in 1578, there

21 As Karin Maag explains, both the Genevan and Zurich academies went by va-
rious names in the sixteenth century, names that sometimes referred only to the higher
level theology school and sometimes indicated the theology school and the lower Latin
school or schools combined as one institution. Maag, Seminar or University?
22 Acta Scholastica, E II 458, 32v; Verzeichnisse der Inhaber, G I 179, 11r.
23 Dejung, Zürcher Pfarrerbuch, 599.

122

Carrie Euler

seems to have been some difficulty filling the position of New Tes-
tament theology. In 1575, the New Testament professor, Heinrich
Bullinger’s son, left the position to become head pastor of St. Pe-
ter’s church in Zurich. Rudolph Körner was chosen to replace him
in 1576, but he only lasted about a year. Körner was a former
student who was only twenty-five at the time and serving as a
deacon in the Fraumünster; it is likely that his year of teaching was
unsuccessful due to his youth and inexperience.24 Instead, Felix
Trüb, the current Hebrew professor and deacon of the Silvershield,
was moved to New Testament. Another young former student,
Heinrich Wolf, son of the aforementioned Johannes Wolf, was put
in the Hebrew position, but Trüb was allowed to keep the Silver-
shield living. Two years later, however, Wolf and Trüb switched
positions, putting Trüb back in Hebrew and Wolf in New Testa-
ment.25 The notes in the records suggest that the move was not
considered necessarily permanent, and that Wolf and the Schulherr
would reconsider every year how things were going. They also
indicate that the faculty hoped to fill the New Testament position
with young men who had recently completed their studies at the
Lectorium itself.26 Four years later, in 1584, Wolf is nowhere to be
found in the records, and it is not clear who was teaching New
Testament. Wolf appears again in 1587 back in the Hebrew posi-
tion and as deacon of the Silvershield. This move was made pos-
sibly because Trüb was able to take over the recently deceased
Ludwig Lavater’s position archdeacon in the Grossmünster. Five
years later Wolf also gave up teaching to take over his father’s
position as head pastor of the Fraumünster.

Although it might take some further research to work out exact-
ly what was happening between Wolf and Trüb, it appears as
though they both preferred to have the Hebrew position, probably
because it came with the house of the Silvershield, or possibly
because they both felt more comfortable in the subject of Hebrew
than that of New Testament theology (which is interesting in itself
and again speaks to Zurich’s focus on Old Testament theology and

24 Verzeichnisse der Inhaber, G I 179, 9r, 13v. Although this record indicates that

Körner started in 1575, other sources suggest it was not until the following year.

25 Ibid., 13r–v.
26 Acta Scholastica, E II 458, 308r.

Faculty Recruitment and Retention in the Early Modern Era

123

language). The main lesson to draw is that both of them eventually
left to became pastors in city churches. In fact, from the early
1580s forward, the New Testament position was filled with recent
graduates of the Lectorium, graduates who soon advanced into
more prestigious positions, either Old Testament or Hebrew
teaching positions or pastoral posts in the city. Rudolf Körner, the
youth first put in the New Testament position in 1576, never went
back to teaching at the Lectorium. He became head pastor at St.
Peter’s in 1583, but he continued to be involved with the schools
as superintendent of the Fraumünster school from 1591 to 1594
and, for a brief time in 1594, as Schulherr.27

This leads back once again to the issue of money, or parsimony.
Not all the professors had full livings from the chapter, and even
when they did, the pay was not great. Most faculty members had
to supplement their living with preaching positions either in the
city or in outlying towns and villages. Kaspar Waser is once again
an example; even though he was deacon of the Silvershield, he
remained pastor of Witikon the entire time he was a professor.
Johannes Wolf remained pastor of the Fraumünster the whole time
he was professor of the Old Testament. Jacob Ulrich, professor of
Latin from 1576 to 1605, was also the pastor at Schwamendingen,
another small town nearby. There are many more similar exam-
ples. The case of Markus Bäumler, who held no other positions
besides professor during his years at the Lectorium, is fairly rare
for this time period.

Another professor who lasted a long time at the Lectorium and
did not take on other pastoral duties was the Professor of Physica
from 1546 to 1563, Conrad Gessner. Gessner was a true scholar
who published several books known to scientists and doctors
throughout Europe.28 At first he was paid a stipend of forty florins
by the city; in 1558, he received one of the canon (Chorherr) sti-
pends in the Grossmünsterstift. In 1563, the faculty and magi-
strates became concerned that Gessner’s teaching load was too
heavy. They offered to relieve him of some of his lectures – putting
in place two young graduates, Georg Keller and Caspar Wolf – but

27 Acta Scholastica, E II 458, 429r; E II, 459, 29r.
28 For more on Gessner, see Urs Leu, Konrad Gessner: Naturforscher und Lehrer, in:

Schola Tigurina: Die Zürcher Hohe Schule und ihre Gelehrten um 1550, 38–41.

124

Carrie Euler

Gessner refused the offer, claiming that it would not look right to
have him receive his stipend without doing the work.29 Two years
later, he died, and Keller and Wolf did, in fact, take over.

Soon after Gessner’s death, a situation arose that demonstrates
how the boundaries between the Lectorium and the Latin schools
were not hard and fast, and how teaching duties could be shuffled
between faculty. In 1566, Ludwig Lavater and Rudolph Funk, tea-
chers at the Fraumünster school, were asked to take on Friday
morning Latin exercises for the Lectorium students, in addition to
their other teaching duties.30 They did this for a year, but in 1567,
they asked to be relieved and were replaced by Georg Keller, pro-
fessor of physics, and Huldrych Zwingli the Younger, professor of
New Testament. Twenty-five years later, the faculty seem to have
adopted a more systematic approach to relieving the burdens of
teaching. In the 1590s, the names of assistant professors (coadju-
tores) start to appear in the records, regularly listed after the names
of the »ordinary« professors.31 The hiring of assistants is a signi-
ficant sign of both the overburdened state of the Lectorium and
also its increasing institutionalization or bureaucratization. The
school had come a long way from the 1520s when the leading
lights of the Zurich Reformation would hold dynamic, interactive
lectures in the nave of the Grossmünster.

The overburdened state of the schools becomes very clear in the
records in the year 1591, when the professors petitioned the city
council for a revision to the – then thirty-one years old – school
ordinance (Ordnung). In this petition, the faculty argued that while
the number of students and the general workload of the professors
had increased over the years, the pay was poor, and many students
and teachers had difficulties supporting their families.32 Their con-
cerns focused around the money in the old chapter foundation
(Stift), and how it was going to run out if things were not changed.
They pointed out that many of the preachers in and around Zurich
were getting old and dying, and they feared there would be no one
to replace them.

29 Acta Scholastica, E II 458, 53v; Ernst, Geschichte, 105.
30 Acta Scholastica, E II 458, 75r.
31 Acta Scholastica, E II 459, 28v; Catalogi Scholae Tigurinae, E II 497, 24.3r–v.
32 Acta Scholastica, E II 458, 431r–432v.

Faculty Recruitment and Retention in the Early Modern Era

125

In addition to shedding light on the financial straits of Zurich
higher education, this document provides a fascinating glimpse
into the mindset of the educators themselves and how they viewed
the recent history of city’s schools. The faculty referred in one
place to the »Reformation of this church« and in another to »the
time of the Reformation.«33 It is clear that they recognized that
they were living at some chronological distance from the time
when the academy and the Zurich Reformed church were founded
in order to spread the »teaching of the holy gospel.« They looked
back with longing to the time of Zwingli and still held strongly to
his original belief that higher education was crucial to the main-
tenance of the Reformed faith. They wrote of the praise that had
been heaped on Zurich by others for its superior school system and
clearly believed that their city had inspired other territories and
cities to establish churches and schools as well. »This Christian and
praiseworthy ordinance,« they declared, »has brought with it such
great use, not only to the city of Zurich with its many churches and
schools in the city and territory, but also other territories, cities,
churches, and communities.«34 Nevertheless, they believed the Zu-
rich schools were in trouble, that many serious problems had de-
veloped with finance, teaching, and administration since the time
of Zwingli. They begged the city council to revise the ordinance so
that »scholarship and teaching and also true religion may be main-
tained.«35

In conclusion, it does appear that »parochialism, parsimony, and
political influence« did guide the hiring of faculty at Zurich’s Lec-
torium between 1560 and 1610. The evidence also suggests that
the increasing burdens of teaching and administration affected the
caliber and prestige of the faculty. In this time period, thirty-two
different men filled the seven permanent faculty positions at the
Lectorium. Only two or three of these men stayed more than fif-
teen years at the academy. More and more, it seems as if profes-
sorships were treated as stepping stones to the more prestigious
preaching positions at city churches.

33 Ibid., 431r.
34 Ibid., 431r.
35 Ibid., 432v.

126

Carrie Euler

One of the most famous seventeenth-century Zurichers will
serve as a final example. Johann Jacob Breitinger taught Latin for a
few years before going on to be pastor of St. Peters and then An-
tistes at the Grossmünster. Breitinger became an internationally
known scholar, author of many works, and was a member of the
Zurich delegation at the Synod of Dort. It is significant, however,
that almost all of his scholarly works appeared during his time as
Antistes, not as professor. While the Lectorium enjoyed a period of
relative stability between 1560 and 1610, in general, Zurich’s
theology professors in this period were, by and large, overworked,
underpaid, and did not have as much time for scholarship.

Carrie Euler, PhD, Associate Professor, Central Michigan University (Mount Pleasant,
MI, USA)

Abstract: Using records from the Zurich Staatsarchiv, this article investigates the faculty
of the Zurich Lectorium between 1560 and 1610. The author argues that this period
was important as an epoch of both stability and transition for the school, a time when
the memory and influence of Zwingli was still strong, but when the school was also
developing into a formal institution of higher learning. Most professors in this era
taught at the school while also holding pastoral positions in and around the city. Con-
sequently, many were overworked, underpaid, and had little time for scholarship.

Keywords: Zurich, Reformed Academy, Faculty, Education

