ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 40 (2013), 101–111

Calvin’s Interpretation of
»Thy Kingdom Come«

John H. Mazaheri

Calvin translates and publishes his Institutes in French for the first
time in 1541, that is five years after the first Latin edition. His
commentary of the second petition of the Lord’s Prayer remains
basically the same in the following editions (till 1557), but for the
definitive version of his work, that of 1560, he rewrites it entirely.
First, I propose a close reading of the 1541–57 text; then I com-
pare it with the last one. Why did the theologian decide to rewrite
his text? How has his theology evolved? Is there any basic change
in his view? These are the questions I am asking in this essay.1

1 On our topic, see also the following studies: Donald K. McKim, Theological Tur-
ning Points: Major Issues in Christian Thought, Atlanta 1988, 151–165; Gunter Zim-
mermann, Die Vereinigung mit Gott und das Reich Christi nach Calvins »Institutio«, in:
Zwingliana 18/3 (1990), 193–212; Wilhelm Niesel, Reformed Symbolics: A Compari-
son of Catholicism, Orthodoxy, and Protestantism, transl. by David Lewis, Edin-
burgh/London 1962, 292–301; J. H. van Wyk, John Calvin on the Kingdom of God and
Eschatology, in: In die Skriflig 35/2 (2001), 191–205; I. John Hesselink, Calvin on the
Kingdom of Christ, in: Religion without Ulterior Motive, ed. E. A. J. G. van der Borght,
Leiden/Boston 2006, 139–158; Theodore Plantinga, Learning to Live with Evil, Grand
Rapids, MI 1982, 135–143; G. Brillenburg Wurth, Calvin and the Kingdom of God, in:
John Calvin: Contemporary Prophet. A Symposium, ed. Jacob T. Hoogstra, Grand
Rapids, MI 1959, 113–126; Timothy George, John Calvin and Menno Simons: Refor-
mation Perspectives on the Kingdom of God, in: Calviniana: Ideas and Influence of Jean
Calvin, ed. Robert V. Schnucker, Kirksville, MO 1988 (Sixteenth Century Essays and
Studies 10), 195–214.

102

John H. Mazaheri

1. The Institutes 1541–1557 (French) editions

Calvin starts by defining the notion of »Kingdom« with regard to
God. He thus states that His Kingdom consists in two parts, both
being readily observable, but of an abstract nature. 1. God rules
through His Holy Spirit in the heart of every believer (»Car il re`gne
premie`rement en tant qu’il dirige et gouverne les siens par son S.
Esprit«.2) The theologian uses three terms to define the role of the
Heavenly King, since it is assumed that there is no kingdom wi-
thout a king. Now the three verbs »re`gne« (rule), »dirige« (direct),
and »gouverne« (govern) have specific meanings. How does He
rule (»il re`gne«)? – The answer is that He governs (»il gouverne«),
which means that He rules with authority. Indeed, one can rule but
not necessarily govern, in which case he would be a king without
authority. But God rules with authority. He also through His Spirit
directs (»il dirige«) His children (»les siens«), i.e. He keeps them in
»right order, controls, and governs their actions«.3 Implicitly, He
does that to prevent them from being tempted by the Devil. Thus
God shows through the believers’ works and words His goodness
and abundant mercy (»pour en toutes leurs œuvres ou parolles
manifester sa bonte´ et les richesses de sa mise´ricorde«). Therefore,
one sign of God’s Kingdom is that He is ruling through one’s good
deeds and words. So whenever we do good, we ought to know that
we are acting under the rule of God, and that we are His obedient
subjects or children. 2. But God rules also over the unbeliever. His
Kingdom can indeed be seen through the punishment of the un-
godly, already here on earth. For God destroys the evil-doers
(»abysme les re´prouvez«). The reprobate (»re´prouvez«) are the
ones rejected or disapproved by God, for they are disobedient sub-
jects, wrong-doers, people who do not care about His rule (»qui ne
le recongnoissent point pour leur Dieu et Seigneur, et ne luy veu-
lent eˆtre subiectz«). God, in this case, throws them into the »ab-
ysme« (abyss), in other words, the »infernal pit« or »hell«4. The

2 Jean Calvin, Institution de la religion chrestienne, ed. Jean-Daniel Benoıˆt, Paris
1960, III, XX, 42. In the earlier editions, this text is the paragraph 36 in chapter XV.
3 The Oxford English Dictionary [OED], 20 vols, Oxford 21989, under »to direct«,

3b.

4 OED, »abyss«, 1c.

Calvin’s Interpretation of »Thy Kingdom Come«

103

Heavenly Father humbles the proud and arrogant people who re-
fuse to recognize Him as their ruler (»rabbat leur orgueil et arro-
gance«). The metaphor explains the fact that God punishes evil-
doers already in this world. One can witness His retribution every
day, Calvin writes: »ces choses se font tous les jours devant noz
yeux«. To sum up, God’s Kingdom is revealed in two ways,
through people’s both good and evil deeds. That is how the Father
shows His authority as the only King. Wrongdoing is punished, but
is the opposite rewarded, according to the theologian? Yes, for
even though it is not explicitly mentioned in his exegesis, the re-
ward is perceived through God’s goodness and mercy, which bring
about happiness and joy.

After this spiritual definition of the Kingdom, Calvin stresses
once more the fact that the latter is already right here on earth
(»On peut veoir que ce Re`gne est mesmes en ce monde«), and
mentions the power of it. Implicitly expressed is the idea that good
people suffer by evil-doers, but God’s Kingdom is not weakend for
all that, for no power is able to resist God’s power: »il n’y a nulle
puissance qui puisse re´sister a` la sienne«. God’s good children suf-
fer indeed in this world, but they must accept life’s challenges and
bear their crosses.5 The good news is that the Lord gives them
courage and does not forsake them: »notre Seigneur donne force et
vigueur a` sa parolle, ainsi e´rige´e comme un sceptre, et la fait fruc-
tifier et re´gner, mesme soubs la croix, contemnement et ignominie
du monde.« Two ideas are pointed out here: 1. He who follows the
Word receives the power to resist all kinds of difficulties and mi-
series in this world, including the torture of the cross (»croix«),
contempt (»contemnement«), and dishonor (»ignominie«); 2. The
Word has a fructifying effect (Dieu »la fait fructifier et re´gner«).
Another explanation is that, believing in the Word makes one
powerful, for it is like a scepter (»comme un sceptre«), which sym-
bolizes the King’s authority and sovereignty.

In a third part of his commentary, the name of the Son is in-
troduced: first God the Father was mentioned, then the Holy Spi-
rit, and now Jesus-Christ. It is not that the Holy Spirit should come

5 Indeed, as Timothy George writes, »The cross of Christ may in no wise be avo-
ided, for the lamb will never be at peace with the wolf, the dove with eagle, Christ with
Belial.« (George, John Calvin and Menno Simons, 207).

104

John H. Mazaheri

before the Son – Calvin’s conception of Christ throughout the In-
stitutes is very clear on this point. The Son is the Word of God, and
so the Holy Spirit, being the power which instils the Word into
one’s conscience, cannot precede it. So the reason why in this ex-
egesis the Son’s name is mentioned after the Holy Spirit, is because
the theologian first explains how the believer is directed. And now
he points out that Christ has expressed the fact that the Kingdom
is within us (»Pourtant aussi Christ dit que le Royaume de Dieu est
en nous«). Two other ideas are then put forth: 1. Christ sometimes
calls the Church »Kingdom of Heaven«, (Il »appelle aucunesfois
l’Eglise le Royaume des cieux«). This church, of which Jesus is the
ruler (»en laquelle vrayement il domine«) is not explained, but one
understands that it is a spiritual place. It is a metaphor, neither a
congregation, nor a building, nor an institution in the concrete
sense, but rather the community of believers. 2. He also sometimes
calls the predication of the Gospel »Kingdom of Heaven« (»au-
cunesfois la pre´dication de l’Evangile«). Christ rules by His Word
(»par laquelle il establist sa domination« – to be understood in the
etymological sense, from dominus, »Lord«). We perceive that the
»Kingdom of God« is both a metaphor and a metonymy: as a
metaphor, it is like a place, though a spiritual one – it is in one’s
heart. It could also be called »Eglise« (church) – from the Latin
ecclesia, meaning »community of the faithful«. However, calling
the predication or the spreading of the Word a »Kingdom« is a
metonymy. The Kingdom is here the belief in the Word of God. If
one does believe, one will preach the Gospel and spread it, and
that is how it is related to the metaphoric kingdom. The citizens of
this Kingdom consider themselves subjects of one king only,
Christ. Indeed, the Kingdom without Him does not mean anyt-
hing, for the Kingdom is his – it is where his Word rules and
governs.

A fourth part of Calvin’s exegesis, in the 1541 edition, concerns
the justification of the request made in the prayer. First, after stres-
sing again the spiritual nature of God’s Kingdom (»il est spirituel
et consiste en choses spirituelles«), he mentions the qualities of it:
incorruptible and eternal (»il est incorruptible et e´ternel«). Second,
the theologian explains the reason for this second petition, since
God’s Kingdom is already here, has always been, and will always

Calvin’s Interpretation of »Thy Kingdom Come«

105

be. Why, indeed, do we have to ask for its coming? There are two
reasons for that, he asserts: 1. We pray for people who do not see
God to be touched by His Grace; in other words we pray for the
unbelievers to join the community of the faithful. We pray for the
wrongdoers to become good. So we pray for the number of belie-
vers, who constitute the true church, to increase every day (»c’est a`
dire que de plus en plus tous les iours nostre Seigneur augmente le
nombre de ses subiectz et fide`les«), and that God may be glorified
in every way (»desquelz il soit en toutes manie`res glorifie´«). 2. We
pray for those, including ourselves, who do believe in Him to have
our faith strengthened. We pray for receiving more and more of
God’s graces (»et qu’en ceux qu’il aura de´sia appellez en son Roy-
aume il distribue et multiplie tousiours plus abondamment ses graˆ-
ces«). I suppose that, since it is about the realm of spirit, the graces
we are asking for must be of spiritual nature. We pray for every-
one, therefore, to become some day united to God. We pray that
God may live and reign in everyone’s heart, and that He make
everyone whole, or perfectly sound: that by his Grace, »de plus en
plus continuellement il vive et re`gne en eux, iusques a` ce que les
ayant parfaictement uniz a` soy, il les remplisse du tout«. This per-
fect unification of humanity with God somewhat reveals a mystical
approach, but this requires a separate discussion, which is beyond
the object of the present essay.

We reach the last part or the conclusion of Calvin’s exegesis,
which is about eschatology, first in the modern theological sense of
the word, or eschatology pertaining to things of this world, then to
eschatology in the traditional sense. In the last phase of human
mental development, according to Calvin, the Devil will be des-
troyed. What is noteworthy is that this happens gradually in this
world, according to the theologian. He thus repeats the expression
»de plus en plus« (more and more); he means to emphasize the fact
that there is an evolution in the human moral advancement. So one
should not think of a sudden radical magical change at some vague
point in the future, but consider a gradual process. Therefore, es-
chatology is being realized little by little.6 It is in the here and now.

6 Donald K. McKim points out that »While Calvin can say that ›the Kingdom of
God increases, stage upon stage, to the end of the world‹, he does not believe in a
gradual, evolutionary growth of the kingdom of God through the structures of the

106

John H. Mazaheri

We pray that »que de plus en plus il veuille illustrer sa lumie`re et sa
ve´rite´. Parquoy les te´ne`bres et mensonges du Diable et de ses sup-
postz s’e´vanouyssent, soient de´chasse´es, confondues et anne´an-
ties«.7 We pray for the progressive realization of the Kingdom, so
that God’s light (»lumie`re«) and truth (»ve´rite´«) be revealed to
everyone, and the Devil (or the evil principle) and its followers
gradually
out
(»de´chasse´es«), unmasked (»confondues«), and annihilated (»an-
ne´anties«). The evil will eventually completely disappear from this
world. We pray for that and believe that it is happening a little
more every day.This is certainly a happy and optimistic vision of
humanity.

(»s’e´vanouissent«),

vanish

be

thrown

But Calvin also believes in eschatology in the traditional sense,
and so in the following way he ends his interpretation: »En priant
que le Re`gne de Dieu advienne ainsi, pareillement nous prions
qu’il soit finalement consomme´ et accomply, qui sera au iour de
son Iugement, quand toutes choses seront re´ve´le´es. Auquel iour lui
seul sera exalte´ et sera tout en tous, apre`s avoir recueilly les siens
en gloire, et avoir de´prime´, subiugue´ et ruyne´ tout le re`gne du
Diable.« Therefore, this concrete world on earth will end for the
humans at some point in time.This last part of the exegesis, con-
cerning the Day of Judgment, shows of course a theologian who
also believes in a world after this material one, which is not sur-
prizing, since this idea is present in the Bible. Calvin, as a faithful
reader of the latter, believes that in that Day everything will be
revealed and that God alone will be exalted. On that day, every-
body will only see Him (»sera tout en tous«), referring to the First
Corinthians 15:28.8 That means that only the believers will re-

present world. The kingdom is not ours to win; it’s God’s to give [...]. The present reign
of God is found where people both by denial of themselves and by contempt of the
world and of earthly life, pledge themselves to God’s righteousness in order to aspire to
a heavenly life.« (McKim, Theological Turning Points, 163).

7 As John Hesselink puts it, »Calvin also makes clear what was only implied before,
namely, that God reigns in two ways: in the renewal of the lives of believers and in the
overcoming of Satan and all God’s ennemies. The goal in both cases is to restore order
in a confused and disordered world, for ›disorder (ataxia) and confusion‹ are the ›op-
posite of the kingdom of God‹.« (Hesselink, Calvin on the Kingdom of Christ, 158).

8 »When all things are subjected to him, then the Son himself will also be subjected
to the one who put all things in subjection under him, so that God may be all in all«
(New Revised Standard Version).

Calvin’s Interpretation of »Thy Kingdom Come«

107

main. In the other world, the Devil will have no place at all, for his
fragile kingdom (»le re`gne du Diable«) will have disappeared: it
will be knocked down (»de´prime´«), subdued (»subjugue´«), and
ruined (»ruine´«). It is noticeable that this last part, devoted to
eschatology in the traditional sense, is but a small section of the
exegesis, which is understandable insofar as nobody knows about
the life beyond this one, but one can talk about the progressive
eschatology in the present material world. So the main part of the
commentary on Matthew 6:10 is about one’s earthly life, i.e. on
eschatolgy in the modern or, if I may say, existentialist sense of the
word. Hope is the fundamental idea, for the Kingdom of God is
being realized before our eyes on a daily basis; it is at our own
hand. Our prayer helps us to appreciate it more and more as we
see ourselves changing into better individuals and enjoying life bet-
ter, and as we see others joining the community of the faithful.
Although not explicit, these ideas are somehow suggested in Cal-
vin’s commentary.

2. The last version of the Institutes

(the 1560 French edition)

We notice first that a few lines have been added to the beginning of
the exegesis. In this introduction the commentator asserts that this
second petition does not bring anything really new to the first.
There is, however, a reason for the redundancy: »Car si nous pen-
sons bien a` nostre tardivete´ et rudesse, il est besoin que nous ayons
les oreilles battues souvent de ce qui doit estre tant et plus
notoire«.9 Two nouns are here stressed: »tardivete´« (slowness,
dullness of intellect or comprehension) and »rudesse« (ignorance,
or even absence of virtue)10. Because we are slow and ignorant, we
need more explanation and repetition. We have ears but we do not
hear, Calvin thinks, so we need to hear the Word of God over and

9 »[f]or if we consider our languor in the greatest matters of all, it behooves us to
extend our discussion in order to drive home something that ought to have been tho-
roughly known of itself« (Institutes of the Christian Religion, ed. John T. McNeill,
transl. Ford Lewis Battles, Louisville, KY 1960, III, XX, 42).

10 See OED, »rudeness«, 2b.

108

John H. Mazaheri

over again (»il est besoin que nous ayons les oreilles battues sou-
vent de ce qui doit estre tant et plus notoire«). If we understand the
first petition, it is »notoire« (from notorius, from noscere, »to
know«), or »it ought to have been thoroughly known of itself«,
that »Hallowed be Thy Name« includes »Thy Kingdom Come«,
but we still need to say it again in a different way. Therefore, after
we pray that God destroy all that stain his holy name (»Apre`s
doncques qu’il nous a este´ ordonne´ de prier Dieu qu’il abbate, et
finalement destruise tout ce qui souille son sacre´ Nom [...]«11), we
pray for the coming of His Kingdom.We see that from the outset
the theologian’s tone is more critical in this last edition. Then he
states that one can talk about God as one’s King only when one
renounces the material world and aspires to live spiritually by de-
voting oneself to God’s justice: »Dieu est tenu pour Roy, quand les
hommes, renonc¸ans a` eux mesmes et mesprisans le monde et ceste
vie terrestre, s’addonnent a` la justice de Dieu pour aspirer a` la vie
ce´leste«.12 He also mentions the fact that he is repeating what he
has already discussed elsewhere – referring to the Institutes III, III,
19. We realize that repetition is deliberate and has a didactic re-
ason for Calvin. Repetition is also used by Jesus, as Calvin con-
tends, in the Lord’s Prayer.

From here the theologian goes back to his 1541 version and
rewrites it, thus expressing in a new way the main idea of the
kingdom on earth as being manifested through God’s retribution.
In the earlier editions, he had divided the kingdom into two parts,
mentioning first God’s goodness and mercy through his deserving
children, then his punishment of the sinners. In the last edition,
however, he uses a bitter tone saying: »Ainsi il y a deux parties de
ce re`gne: c’est que Dieu corrige et abbate par la vertu de son Esprit
toutes cupiditez de la chair, lesquelles se dressent a` grand foulle
pour batailler contre luy. Secondement, qu’il plie et forme tous nos
sens pour les assuiettir a` son empire«.13 The emphasis is put on

11 »Therefore, after we have been bidden to ask God to subject and finally com-

pletely destroy everything that casts a stain upon his holy name [...].«

12 »God reigns where men, both by denial of themselves and by contempt of the
world and of earthly life, pledge themselves to his righteousness in order to aspire to a
heavenly life.«

13 »Thus there are two parts to this Kingdom: first, that God by the power of his
Spirit correct all the desires of the flesh which by squadrons war against him; second,
that he shape all our thoughts in obedience to his rule.«

Calvin’s Interpretation of »Thy Kingdom Come«

109

»correction«, and the distinction between reward and punishment,
or good people and evildoers, is not made here. Everyone is equally
concerned. The two following stages are indicated: 1. The destruc-
tion of evil tendencies and thoughts in humans. 2. The »the rule«
of God.

Another point the theologian makes is that, in order to become a
good subject of God as King, is to start with oneself. Before we
wish to change the society, we must change ourselves: »Pourtant,
quiconque veut tenir bon ordre en ceste requeste, il faut qu’il com-
mence par soy, de´sirant d’estre purge´ de toutes corruptions qui
troublent en son cœur l’estat paisible du re`gne de Dieu, et en in-
fectent la purete´.«14 Self-criticism is an essential feature of the new
version. In the 1541 version of the Institutes, the prayer stresses
more God’s action, whereas in the last edition, the theologian asks
for more effort from humans. The human will and responsibility
are, indeed, more strongly expressed in this edition. The fact that
all are sinners is also better articulated here. Everyone, he insists,
must follow His Word, which is like a scepter: »Au reste pource
que la parolle de Dieu est comme un sceptre royal, il nous est ici
ordonne´ de prier qu’il assuiestisse les esprits et les cœurs de tous a`
une obe´issance volontaire d’icelle.«15

The concept of church is also differently conveyed in the new
edition. The theologian is less abstract here and talks of church not
as much as Jesus does, which corresponds more to the spirit of the
first edition, but rather as Paul does. The church has become a
more concrete group of Christians. The idea of mission is then
conspicuous in the last edition. After we have reached – although
not explicit, this idea is presupposed – a certain degree of maturity
in our faith, we must go and rescue others: »Apre`s nous pourrons
descendre aux meschans qui re´sistent a` son empire avec obstina-
tion et fureur de´sespe´re´e,«16 and »Nous avons a` de´sirer que cela
[God’s retributive justice] se face chacun iour, afin que Dieu re-

14 »Therefore, no others keep a lawful order in this petition but those who begin
with themselves, that is, to be cleansed of all corruptions that disturb the peaceful state
of God’s Kingdom and sully its purity.«

15 »Now, because the word of God is like a royal scepter, we are bidden here to

entreat him to bring all men’s minds and hearts into voluntary obedience to it.«

16 »Afterward we should descend to the impious, who stubbornly and with despe-

rate madness resist his authority.«

110

John H. Mazaheri

cueille des e´glises de toutes les parties du monde, qu’il les multiplie
en nombre, qu’il les enrichisse de ses dons, qu’il y establisse bon
ordre [...]«17

The following ideas are already clearly presented in the 1541
edition, but in 1560 they are simply rephrased: the perfect world
will come with the coming of Christ, one must patiently bear one’s
Cross, etc. The idea of evolution, a gradual improvement of hu-
mans’ understanding of God and morals, is also present. The end-
ing is hopeful and somewhat similar to the first edition. I note,
however, that the term »Antechrist« is used in 1560, instead of
»Diable«, which is actually the last word of his commentary in
1541 – the Devil who will be completely destroyed. Moreover, in
the first edition, Calvin calls the ending of our material world the
Day of Judgment (»jour de son Iugement, quand toutes choses
seront re´ve´le´es«), whereas in 1560, the ending is presented as the
Day when Antichrist is destroyed and that God has eliminated
»toute impie´te´ par la clarte´ de son adve`nement.«18

3. Conclusion

First, the fact that Calvin needed to write anew his text is signifi-
cant. His interpretation has not changed so much, although a shift
from Jesus’ view of the church to Paul’s view of it is in my opinion
rather important. But, one might argue, since Jesus is being vague
on this issue, it is hard to prove that there is a real difference
between Paul and him. Furthermore, it seems that Calvin has psy-
chologically changed: he is less optimistic, and needs to blame our-
selves more for our shortcomings. He does not exclude himself of
course. It is self-criticism at the same time. Finally, the fact that the
theologian wants to say in a different and longer way basically the
same things, justifies what he considers redundancy in Jesus, since,

17 »We must daily desire that God gather churches unto himself from all parts of the
earth; that he spread and increase them in number; that he adorn them with gifts, that
he establish a lawful order among them [...].«

18 »at last he slays Antichrist with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroys all ungod-
liness by the brightness of his coming.« He thus refers to II Thess. (2:8): »And then the
lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will destroy with the breath of his
mouth, annihilating him by the manifestation of his coming.«

Calvin’s Interpretation of »Thy Kingdom Come«

111

according to Calvin, the first petition should also make the second
one obvious (»notoire«).

John H. Mazaheri, PhD, Professor of French, Auburn University (Auburn, AL, USA)

Abstract: In this article I compare Calvin’s exegesis of the Second Petition of The
Lord’s Prayer in the 1541–57 editions of the Institutes with the one he offers in the last
edition of his work (1560). My close reading is based on the French editions only with a
rhetorical approach. First, it is interesting to note that for the last edition Calvin re-
wrote his paragraph on the Second Petition entirely, which he had also done with the
First Petition. Second, the formal structures as well as the content are somewhat dif-
ferent. In the 1541–57 editions, the paragraph is divided into two parts: (1) He explains
the reason why we pray that God be considered our only king – implicitly no other
(earthly) ruler should be accepted. (2) He explains why right here on Earth already we
are punished, if we do not accept this principle and follow another ruler. Therefore,
»Thy Kingdom come« is not only about the future, but also about now. It is an exis-
tential issue. In the 1560 edition, Calvin divides his paragraph into three parts: (1) He
claims that the First and the Second Petitions say basically the same thing. So the reason
for the repetition is just because we are too slow to understand God. Besides, if we
believe in Him, we have to deny ourselves and despise our earthly life, and consider the
Lord our only ruler and king, right here and now. (2) We pray that God destroy the Evil
that is in everyone. (3) We pray that we live according to God’s rule alone. To conclude,
two important differences are stressed: (1) In the last edition, Calvin puts more em-
phasis on the evil spirit in humans. (2) Although in all the editions of the Institutes the
crucial role of the Holy Spirit is mentioned, it is only in the last edition that the name of
Christ appears, the Son without whom we cannot live in God’s Kingdom.

Keywords: John Calvin, Lord’s Prayer

