ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 40 (2013), 73–99

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston

de la foy chrestienne«

From Personal Notebook to Patristic

Anthology (1555–1565)

Erik A. de Boer

1. Introduction

Guy de Bre`s (c. 1520–1567) is best known as the primary author
of the Confession de foy, published in 1561, translated into Dutch
in 1562, which is also called »Confessio Belgica« or »Belgic Con-
fession«. His very first, far less known publication is an anthology
entitled Le baston de la foy chrestienne, whose first edition
appeared in 1555. This work is a compilation of quotations from
the Scriptures and the church fathers, organized thematically.
Within a time span of no more than ten years, this work saw at
least seventeen editions, all of which appeared during De Bre`s’s
lifetime. If a Dutch translation existed, as may indeed have been
the case, it at any rate did not survive in publication.1 In 1577 the
book was translated into English as The Staffe of Christian Faith
(although never reprinted). After the death of De Bre`s, Le baston
was reprinted only a single time, in Saumur in 1601. Nevertheless,
the work can be regarded as a French language bestseller, being

1 See Erik A. de Boer, »Le baston« in Nederlandse vertaling?, in: Guido de Bres:
Zijn leven, zijn belijden, ed. Emile Braekman, Erik A. de Boer, Utrecht 2011, 90–93.

74

Erik A. de Boer

published between 1555 and 1565 in Antwerpen, Geneva, Lyon,
and Caen. As such, it was a popular handbook in the clash of the
confessions.

The present study focuses on the genesis of Le baston de la foy
chrestienne, investigating it in relation to the theological formation
of the author of the Belgic Confession. The question regarding De
Bre`s’s theological training is all the more a pressing one since, as
Johan Decavele has pointed out, the formation of all known pre-
achers from the Southern Pays Bas (Nether Lands) in a religious
order or university is known, with the one exception of Guy de
Bre`s.2 His second, larger work, entitled La racine, source et fon-
dament des Anabaptistes (1565), also testifies to his intellectual
maturity and later theological orientation in a dispute he held with
the Anabaptists of his days, but it contains no patristic references.
The letters of De Bre`s, which report the disputes held in prison in
1567 and were published in Procedures tenues (1568), do in con-
trast testify to his knowledge and handling of patristic sources. The
present article, however, will look primarily at the first work of De
Bre`s that testifies to his knowledge of the fathers of the church.

2. The Swiss connection

Most biographies relate the bare facts of De Bre`s’s birth (c. 1520)
in Bergen (Mons), in the Southern Low Countries, as the son of a
glass painter, and of his flight to London around 1548.3 Upon his
return to the country of his birth, De Bre`s became minister of the
Word in Rijssel (Lille) around 1550. In 1555 he published Le bas-
ton de la foy chrestienne, before travelling on to Lausanne and
Geneva for further studies in 1556. But what can be said of De
Bre`s’s theological education? Is there a link between his earlier

2 Johan Decavele, La place de Guy de Bre`s dans la Re´forme et son e´poque, in: The
Belgic Confession at 450, ed. Andreas J. Beck et al., Maastricht 2012 (Analecta Bru-
xelliana 15), 30–40.

3 Biographies: L.A. Van Langeraad, Guido de Bray: Zijn leven en werken. Bijdrage
tot de geschiedenis van het Zuid-Nederlandsche protestantisme, Zierikzee 1884; A.L.E.
Verheyden, Anabaptism in Flanders 1530–1650, Scottdale, PA 1961 (Studies in Ana-
baptist and Mennonite History 9); Braekman/De Boer, Guido de Bres.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

75

work on Le baston (which was probably finalized in Ghent) and
his subsequent pursuit of theological studies?

The aforementioned facts concerning De Bre`s’s whereabouts un-
til 1556 are all found in one source, namely, the brief biographical
account which Jean Crespin gave in the booklet Procedures tenues
(1568) and later incorporated into his Histoire des vrays tesmoins
de la verite´ de l’Evangile (1570). In the absence of further data
from this period in his life, De Bre`s’s subsequent biographers have
tended to fill the lacunae by recounting who else was at work in
those cities when he is thought to have been living there, and
whom he therefore may have met or heard. But are there additio-
nal historical data which may substantiate Crespin’s testimony and
inform us on De Bre`s’s theological formation?

In the long letter which Guy de Bre`s wrote from prison to his
flock in Valenciennes, he reported on the interrogation he under-
went in April 1567. The bishop of Arras, Franc¸ois Richardot,
made an opening statement to which De Bre`s responded as fol-
lows:

»Regarding my salvation, I dare say that I have been as eager to learn as
any man. For that reason I have investigated the various sects and teachings
which are found in Christianity, so that at least I could understand, tra-
velling back and forth from one country to the other«.4

This statement in which De Bre`s mentions his travels is somewhat
ambiguous, however. After all, it could refer either to the conti-
nuous journeys he undertook in serving the faithful in the southern
Netherlands, or else, more specifically, to the peregrinatio acade-
mica on which he embarked through the German and Swiss ter-
ritories.

Confirmation for Guy de Bre`s’s Swiss connection comes from
third party testimonies. The first is the long report on the confis-
cation of papers from De Bre`s’s hiding place in Doornik (Tournai)

4 Procedures ausquelles est deduit comme Guy du Bres et Peregrin de La Grange ont
signe´ par leur sang la doctrine de l’Evangile, in: F. Pijper (ed.), Bibliotheca Reformatoria
Neerlandica, vol. 8, ’s-Gravenhage 1911, 561f. Cf. preface to Le baston: »L’un des
jours nous avons la guerre contre les heretiques Anabaptistes, l’autre contre les Libertins
et Epicuriens, contre les Arriens en contre les Davidistes en contre les dissimulateurs, et
consequemment contre les venerateurs des Peres, par le zele desquels les enfans de Dieu
sont mis a` mort« (1558/1, 13).

76

Erik A. de Boer

on 10 January 1562. The report was written by the commissioners
who were investigating the whereabouts of De Bre`s on behalf of
the governess, Margaret of Parma. Among De Bre`s’s papers, notes,
and books, the officials also found a number of letters. The first
letter, whose contents are unknown, is identified as being from the
year 1556 and written by Jean Calvin.5 The second one was by
Petrus Dathenus, »who calls himself minister of the Word of God
of the Flemish in Frankfort, and who addresses the said Guy as
minister of the Word of God in the Netherlands«.

The next line in the officials’ report to the governess contains the
first evidence concerning De Bre`s’s formative years: »We have also
found out that the said Guy made the start to his aberrations in
Lausanne and in Geneva«. Did the letters from Calvin and Dathe-
nus reveal this specific information? This is in any case what the
investigators concluded on the basis of the documentation they
confiscated from De Bre`s’s lodgings. They also describe a third
letter in the report of their findings: »Also another letter to Jean
Crespin from the year 1559, who requests from him the catalogue
of martyrs who are amidst those who he knows are worthy of that
title and honor, since he is making an account both in French as
well as in Latin.«6 The Genevan printer was thus building a net-
work to obtain reliable sources for his work on Reformed martyr-
dom, and may have met De Bre`s in Frankfort during a visit to the
book fair there.7 The three confiscated letters thus establish a link
to Geneva and Calvin in the second half of the 1550s.

But what is the bearing of the details which were later published
by Jean Crespin? Guy de Bre`s and Pe´re´grin de la Grange were
executed on 1 June 1567. The next year a booklet was published
anonymously, written on the basis of the letters which De Bre`s sent

5 Van Langeraad, Guido de Bray, 22: »[...] et entre icelles une lettre de Jan Calvin
de l’an 1556, par lesquelles il respond a` certaines questions, que luy avoit propose´ ledt.
Guy, dont nous envoions extraict a` vostre Alteze«. Another point of contact between
Geneva and Calvin is documented by the letter which the churches sent to Geneva,
asking for approval of the Belgic Confession, see Erik A. de Boer, Calvijns brief over De
Bres’ belijdenis, in: Braekman/De Boer, Guido de Bres, 169–173, 181–183.

6 Source: Papiers d’Etat, Correspondence de Tournay, 1561–1563, f. 136–138

(printed in Van Langeraad, Guido de Bray, 46).

7 Jean-Franc¸ois Gilmont, Jean Crespin: un e´diteur re´forme´ du XVIe sie`cle, Geneva

1981 (Travaux d’Humanisme et Renaissance 186), 202, n. 65.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

77

from prison to his congregation and which contain the documen-
tation of his trial until the day of his execution: Procedures tenues
a` l’endroit de ceux de la religion du Pais-Bas (1568).8 The intro-
duction to this work includes a brief biographical sketch of De
Bre`s, with the following data:

»Concerning his erudition with which God had enriched him – after having
made him study in Geneva and Lausanne – it is not necessary to dwell upon
this aspect for a long time, since not only his last debates, which are found
in this book, testify to it and give proof of his faithfulness, but also a
Compilation he made of the Old Doctors, called Le baston de la foy, and
what he assembled against the Anabaptists [...]«9

That Guy de Bre`s had studied theology in Geneva and Lausanne
was thus knowledge preserved in the collective memory of his con-
gregations in Lille, Tournai, and Valenciennes. The editor of this
booklet, Jean Crespin, may in fact also have been the one to write
these lines.

A third written testimony is found in Crespin’s Histoire des mar-
tyrs. In the 1570 edition of his Histoire des vrays tesmoins, the
learned editor incorporated the documentation of the trial and ex-
ecution of Guy de Bre`s and Pe´re´grin de la Grange as it had earlier
been published as the Procedures tenues. He concluded this ac-
count with the »specific tale of the life and death of the two said
ministers«, together with some other short biographies. Crespin
first described De Bre`s’s birth in Mons (Flemish: Bergen), his flight
to England, and the time he spent in his first congregation in Lille.
In the wake of the trial against the Ogvier family, De Bre`s then left

8 Gilmont identified Jean Crespin in Geneva as the editor (Gilmont, Jean Crespin,
257; Jean-Franc¸ois Gilmont, Bibliographie des e´ditions de Jean Crespin 1550–1572,
vol. 1, Verviers 1981, 68/8; Jean-Franc¸ois Gilmont, Nouveau bilan bibliographique, in:
Bulletin de la Socie´te´ d’Histoire du Protestantisme Belge 7/2 (1977), 32.

9 »Quant a` l’erudition de laquelle Dieu l’avoit enrichi depuis l’avoir fait venir es-
tudier a` Geneve et Lausanne, il n’est besoin d’en tenir grand propos, par ce que non
seulement ses dernieres disputes contenues en ce livre, en rendent tesmoignage, et font
foy de sa fidelite´, mais aussi un Recueil qu’il a fait des Anciens Docteurs, intitule´ le
Baston de la foy, et ce qu’il assemble´ contre les Anabaptistes [...]« (Procedures ausquel-
les est deduit comme Guy du Bres et Peregrin de La Grange ont signe´ par leur sang la
doctrine de l’Evangile, in: Pijper, Bibliotheca Reformatoria Neerlandica, vol. 8, 497).
Crespin incorporated this booklet from 1568 in the 1570 edition of his Histoire des
vrays tesmoins de la verite´ de l’Evangile, book 9, (ed. J.D. Benoit, vol. 3, 533–584).

78

Erik A. de Boer

Lille and travelled to Ghent where, according to Crespin, he com-
piled his first book, Le baston de la foy, »drawn from the old
doctors«.

»As he was eager to have a wider range of learning as required for the
ministry, he then made his way to Lausanne and Geneva, to that end and
also to learn the Latin language. After having lived there for some time he
returned to the Netherlands and restored the churches in Lille, Tournai, and
Valenciennes [...]«10

The fact that Crespin published the account of the oppression in
Valenciennes and added it to his »History of the True Witnesses«
tells us that he was in close touch with the congregation of De Bre`s
and De la Grange.

One example may suffice to illustrate De Bre`s’s involvement in
Crespin’s enterprise for an account of Reformed martyrdom. The
latter began his account of the year 1556 in the Histoire des mar-
tyrs (1556) by relating the deaths of the four martyrs from Lille in
Flanders, namely, the Ogvier household. In the letter written by
the elder son Baudechon (and added to the 1564 edition), we find
an exhortation to follow the narrow road, »as it has until now
been shown to you very faithfully and with great ardour by our
brother G[uy] who is well known to and respected by you all«.11
According to the report, his younger brother Martin Ogvier too
had stirred up some of his fellow prisoners, saying: »Be quiet, my
brothers, take heart, it is finished: I have endured a last assault. I
beseech you, do not forget the holy doctrine of the Gospel and the
good lessons you have heard from our brother Guy«.12

10 [Jean Crespin], Histoire des vrays tesmoins de la verite´ de l’Evangile, qui de leur
sang l’ont signe´e, depuis Jean Hus jusques au temps present, [Geneva]: Jean Crespin,
1570: »Depuis, comme il estoit studieux de savoir plus amplement ce qui est requis au
ministere, il s’achemina vers Lausanne et Gene`ve, a` ces fins et pour apprendre la langue
Latine. Apres y avoit demeure´ quelque temps, renevu qu’il fut au Pais-bas, redressa les
eglises a˜ Lisle, Tournay, et Vallencennes, si bien qu’en servant ausdites villes Dieu le
preserva, comme au milieu des feuz allumez, de ne tomer e´s mains des ennemis« (book
8, p. 690f.; photomechanical reprint 1964).

11 Jean Crespin, Histoire des martyrs persecutez et mis a` mort pour la verite´ de
l’evangile, depuis le temps des apostres jusques a` present, ed. Jean-Daniel Benoit, vol. 2,
Toulouse 1887, 411.

12 Crespin, Histoire des martyrs, ed. Benoit, vol. 2, 415.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

79

The sum of our knowledge of De Bre`s’s education therefore
amounts to the following. The report of the commissioners after
they had searched De Bre`s’ house in 1561 was based on at least
three letters, written to De Bre`s (by Calvin, Dathenus, and Cre-
spin), proving his ties to Geneva. The second note on his theolo-
gical formation dates from 1568 and comes from sources close to
Crespin. The latter’s expanded biographical account (1570) pro-
vided more detailed information. The sources therefore allow us to
formulate the following initial conclusion: although Guy de Bre`s
had already served as minister, he decided to pursue theological
studies in order to improve his skills. His work on the first edition
of Le baston, which was the fruit of his early ministry, made him
aware especially of his lack of knowledge of Latin, the language in
which the church fathers were primarily transmitted in the sixte-
enth century. To remedy this he travelled to the Reformed centres
of learning that would have been most profitable to French-speak-
ing students, namely, Lausanne and Geneva.

3. Theological training in London

One question that remains, of course, is how Guy de Bre`s became
a minister of the Word in the first place. Crespin reported that he
left Mons (Bergen), the village of his birth, and settled in London
»at the time when the good king Edward VI had given harbour
and access in the kingdom of Britain to all the faithful.«13 Was he
trained for the ministry of »prophecy« as it had been instituted
there by John a Lasco?14 It is quite likely that De Bre`s joined the
French-speaking congregation in London (or in one of the villages

13 Crespin, Histoire des martyrs, ed. Benoit, vol. 3 (1889), 581; cf. Braekman/De

Boer, Guido de Bres, 52–62.

14 Cf. Emile Braekman, Theological Training of Reformed Ministers of the Low
Countries, in: Academic Relations Between the Low Countries and the British Isles
1450–1700: Proceedings of the First Conference of Belgian, British and Dutch Histo-
rians of Universities held in Ghent 1989, ed. H. de Ridder-Symoens, J.M. Fletcher, Gent
1989 (Studia Historica Gandensia 273), 89. On De Bre`s and the London »prophe´tie«,
see Erik A. de Boer, The Genevan School of the Prophets: The Congre´gations of the
Company of Pastors and their Influence in 16th Century Europe, Geneva 2012 (Travaux
d’Humanisme et Renaissance 512), 244–249.

80

Erik A. de Boer

on the coast), and visited »la prophe´tie« held every week on Tues-
days. His ability to translate a Dutch work into French in later
years15 suggests that he may earlier already have been able to un-
derstand the Dutch language. If this is true, it is also possible that
he attended the Thursday prophecies organized by the Flemish
theologian Marten de Cleyne (1523–1559), also known as Mi-
cron(ius).16 But the Latin courses on the Old and New Testament
given by Walter Delenus and John a Lasco may at that time still
have been too difficult for De Bre`s to follow.

There is one point in his works at which De Bre`s seems to hint at
his experience in such training centres of the early Reformed re-
fugee churches. In a pamphlet entitled Oraison au Seigneur and
attributed to Guy de Bre`s,17 a section of the prayer is devoted to
the ministry of the Word. The author beseeches the Lord to pro-
vide his gifts and grace »to us and our children, so that true teach-
ing may be given to them such as it has been in former times in the
early Church. We ask you that in all faithful assemblies teaching
will be coupled with admonition and correction, and that your
holy doctrine will be administered according to the right use of the
keys, so that the training in holy propositions (les exercices des
sainctes propositions) and congre´gations, and also the schools, will
be purely instituted and maintained«.18

The use of the term congre´gations in this context suggests that
de Bre`s is thinking back to the practice as it had been established in
Geneva, the only place where this term was used at the time.19 The
congre´gation was the weekly Bible study meeting of the Company
of Pastors in Geneva where in lectio continua a biblical book was

15 Close to »Le baston« is the translation into French which Guy de Bre`s made of a
Dutch work in 1565: »The Remarkable History of the Betrayal and Imprisonment of
Two Good and Faithful Persons in the City of Antwerp, that is Christophle Fabri,
Minister of the Word in said city, and Olivier Bouck, Professor in Latin«. The margins
contain many patristic and even scholastic quotations.

16 See the description in Marten Micron, Christelicke ordinancien der Nederlant-
scher ghemeinten te London (1554), ed. W.F. Dankbaar, ’s-Gravenhage 1956 (Kerk-
historische studie¨n 7), 37.

17 J. Lindeboom, Een gebed van Guy de Bre`s, in: Archief van de Nederlandse Kerk-

geschiedenis 20 (1924), 161–178.

18 Lindeboom, Een gebed van Guy de Bre`s, 176; Guy de Bre`s: Pages choisies, ed.

Emile Braekman, Brussels 1967, 27.

19 See De Boer, The Genevan School of the Prophets.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

81

expounded. All ministers were obliged to be present, but also lay
members of
the Church were welcome to attend and raise
questions. In the refugee Churches abroad other forms developed,
in which training and selection for the ministry became more cen-
tral. In his Le baston de la foy, de Bre`s would include a chapter on
»the assemblies and gatherings of the faithful« (des assemblees et
congregations des fideles). Quoting from the New Testament, Hil-
ary of Poitiers, Tertullian, Pliny’s letter to Trajan, and the Historia
Tripartita, De Bre`s instructed his fellow believers as to how they
could defend the gatherings they held as a congregation on Sun-
days and during the week against the Roman Catholic insistence
on attending the Mass. Therefore, the chapter on »assemble´es et
congre´gations« in Le baston de la foy, written before the years of
his study in Lausanne and Geneva, does not appear to use the term
»congre´gations« in its technical sense as referring to the kind of
Bible study meetings held by pastors during the week (as in Gene-
va).20 However, the later pamphlet Oraison au Seigneur, published
in 1564, clearly does point to such meetings for biblical exposition
and training for the ministry.

While in London, De Bre`s may have frequented the »prophe´tie«
of the Walloon church there.21 As has been noted, the aforemen-
tioned passage from Oraison du Seigneur of 1564 testifies to the
practice maintained by the ministers of a region (e.g. the classis of
Lausanne) or city to hold Bible study meetings, as it had developed
in Geneva and was followed in the refugee churches in and around
London. The synod of the »Churches under the Cross,« held in
Antwerp in November 1564, adopted the following resolution:

»Because the ministers have no opportunity to confer regularly on Chris-
tian doctrine except during synod, every time they come together for this
matter the ministers who are present shall take turns at the end of every
morning and after dinner to treat a passage from Scripture in order to
express the unity of doctrine which is among them [...]«22

20 [Guy de Bre`s], Le baston de la foy chrestienne, [Geneva]: Nicolas Barbier and

Thomas Courteau, 1559, 260–263.

21 Cf. Braekman, Guy de Bres: Pages choisies, 59f.
22 »D’autant que les Ministres n’ont moyen de conferer souvent ensemble de la
doctrine Chrestiene, sinon au Synode, que toutes les fois que l’on s’assemblera ensemble
pour ceste affaire, les Ministres qui y assisteront, ayent tour-a`-tour chaque matinee et
apres disner, a` traiter quelque passage de l’escriture saincte, pour tesmoigner de l’union

82

Erik A. de Boer

It is not known whether De Bre`s was present at that synod of
November 1564.23 But then again, he was not the only minister
who had been trained abroad in »prophecy«.24

It is not possible to establish the level of training which men like
the young Guy de Bre`s could have received in »la prophe´tie« in
London. While such meetings focused on the exposition of the
Scriptures, they lacked any kind of academic standard. De Bre`s’s
preparations for the ministry seem to have been limited to the
training he received in London. Therefore, at the time he served the
faithful during his first tour of duty in Lille from 1550 he 1555, he
had to expand his knowledge through personal study. How intense
his studies were is testified by the theological notebook which he
published after his first five years in the ministry, namely, Le bas-
ton de la foy chrestienne.

4. Introducing »Le baston de la foy« (1555)

Le baston de la foy chrestienne is not a straightforward presenta-
tion of De Bre`s’s own emerging theology, but a compilation from
the works of other authors. As an anthology of quotes from the
Bible and the church fathers, it is necessary to read between the
lines in order to try and detect De Bre`s’s own systematic theolo-
gical thinking.25 It may in fact be helpful to read this book as the
kind of notebook students had more commonly, with De Bre`s
keeping notes on the »loci communes« he detected in Scripture and
the fathers when he turned to read them in his personal studies.
After all, patristic authority played a large role in Reformation

de doctrine qui est entre eux, et pareillement les Diacres perpetuels, pour voir le profit
qu’ils auront fait en l’exercice de leur vocation« (article 3 of the Synod held at la Vigne
[Antwerp], 21 November 1564) (Livre synodal contenant les articles re´solus dans le
synodes des E´ glises Wallones des Pays-Bas, vol. 1 [1563–1685], ’s-Gravenhage 1896,
10).

23 Braekman/De Boer, Guido de Bres, 198.
24 Cf. Braekman, Theological Training, 89.
25 Jean-Franc¸ois Gilmont, Les e´crits de Guy de Bre`s: E´ ditions des XVIe et XVIIe
sie`cles, in: Bulletin de la Socie´te´ d’Histoire du Protestantisme Belge 5/8 (1971), 265–275;
Gilmont, Guy de Bres: Nouveau bilan bibliographique, 29–36; Emile Braekman, Les
editions du »Baston de la foy chrestienne«, in: Revue d’Histoire et de Philosophie Re-
ligieuses 56 (1976), 315–345.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

83

polemics.26 Le baston came out in 1555, when De Bre`s had left his
congregation in Lille and was working in Gand (Ghent) for a year.
He dedicated the book to his flock, a written legacy to his training
for defending the Reformed doctrine.

When Guy de Bre`s compiled the first edition of Le baston de la
foy, he wrote it explicitly against a book written by a Roman
Catholic author, the Parisian monk Nicole Grenier, which was first
published in 1547 and widely disseminated since: Le bouclier de la
foy chrestienne (»The Shield of Faith, in the Form of a Dialogue,
taken from Holy Scripture«).27 The Bouclier saw at least eighteen
editions between the time of its initial publication and 1555, when
De Bre`s published his response. To understand this latter response,
it is necessary first of all to examine Grenier’s own work. What
points of Grenier’s attack on the »Lutherans« had touched De
Bre`s’s theological sensitivities? In the Bouclier, Grenier had pro-
vided his readers with quotations from the church fathers in Latin,
which he had also translated into French for the sake of his rea-
dership, for every point of doctrine that was in dispute between
Rome and Reformation. The book had the form of a dialogue
between Walker (»Le bien allant«) and Wanderer (»Le mal al-
lant«), the first being an informed churchman and the other an
erring spirit. The destiny of their long walk is Jerusalem – that is,
Rome.

In order to counter this attack, De Bre`s decided to produce a
better anthology of biblical and patristic quotations in French,
which Protestant converts could read, memorize, and use in debate
with parish priests or official inquisitors. To understand De Bre`s’s
mind, one must look at his choice of texts and quotes and their
order, at the editorial lines he himself inserted between them, and

26 Cf. the most recent work on editions of Augustine’s works, Arnoud S.Q. Visser,
Reading Augustine in the Reformation: The Flexibility of Intellectual Authority in Eu-
rope, 1500–1620, Oxford 2011 (Oxford Studies in Historical Theology). For a similar
notebook, which was perhaps used as a catalogue of a personal library, see Martin
Bucer and Matthew Parker, Florilegium patristicum, in: Martini Buceri Opera Latina,
vol. 3, ed. Pierre Fraenkel, Leiden 1988.

27 Andrew Pettegree et al., French Vernacular Books, vol. 1, Leiden/Boston 2007,
nos 23578ff. See R.E. Hallmark, Defenders of the Faith: The Case of Nicole Grenier,
in: Renaissance Studies 11/2 (1997), 123–140.

84

Erik A. de Boer

at the additions and the reorganization of material found in sub-
sequent editions.

At the beginning of his dialogue, Grenier presented an alpha-
betical list of forty church fathers quoted in his book: »The names
of the holy fathers and ancient doctors of the Church, whose say-
ings have been brought together in this book to confirm the articles
of our faith contained therein – with the year in which they flou-
rished or died in the Christian Church according to Trithemius in
his Book on the ecclesiastical writings«.28 One entry in Grenier’s
list is the general »various famous councils of the Church in dif-
ferent times«. When Guy de Bre`s compiled his own book in re-
sponse, he listed the fathers in chronological order, and added to
their names a list of fourteen councils. The chronology begins with
the author Dionysius the Areopagite (now commonly known as
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, a fifth- and sixth-century Chris-
tian theologian and philosopher), whom De Bre`s regarded as the
convert of St. Paul mentioned in Acts 17:34, and who is thought to
have died in 96 CE. Dionysius’s name is then followed by Clement
of Rome, who lived at the end of the first century. But whereas the
last father on Grenier’s list is Pope Gregory I, De Bre`s went much
further in time and also included references to Thomas Aquinas
and Jean Gerson. The names and quotations were thus chosen to
have the most impact on the adversary in the confessional debate.
In 1555, De Bre`s may not have been aware that another man
had already written a response to Grenier’s Le bouclier de la foy.
The first edition of that response seems to have been published in
Paris, with nearly the same title as that of Grenier’s book: Bouclier
de la foy chrestienne de forme de dialogue, written by Barthe´lemy
Causse and published in 1554 by Vivant Gaulterot.29 Interestingly,
Gaulterot himself had published ten editions of Grenier’s Le bou-
clier de la foy, the first in 1547, the last in 1552. Of course, it is
possible that the name of the editor and the place of publication
for Causse’s work were intentionally chosen as fakes. In fact, the
second edition of Barthe´lemy Causse’s book, which now bore the
title Le vray bouclier de la foy chrestienne, appeared in Geneva in

28 Nicole Grenier, Le bouclier de la foy chrestienne, Paris 1547. For the patristic

facts he relied on Johannes Trithemius, Liber de scriptoribus ecclesiasticis (1531).

29 Pettegree et al., French Vernacular Books, vol. 1, no 9459.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

85

1557 from the presses of Jean Crespin, and in 1558 and onwards
from the presses of Zacharie Durand.30 There is one major diffe-
rence between these two responses to Grenier’s Bouclier de la foy.
While Causse, like Grenier, cast his response in the form of a dia-
logue, De Bre`s compiled an anthology of quotations from the
church fathers and organized them topically.31

5. Studies in Lausanne: Jeronime le Grand?

Even with the 1555 edition of Le baston de la foy, De Bre`s appears
not to have considered himself a professional theologian, for he is
reported to have travelled to Lausanne after the time of its publi-
cation. Apart from the testimonies discussed in the first section, no
further sources have been found placing De Bre`s at Lausanne. The
historian of the Reformation in the Pays de Vaud, Henri Vuille-
umier, included the following entry in his list of students: »De
Bray, Guy, de Mons, ancien boursier de LL. EE. de Lausanne«.32
However, neither Karine Crousaz’s research in the archives of Bern
and Lausanne, nor her thorough study on the Academy of Lau-
sanne, were able to corroborate this piece of information. No Guy
de Bre`s or du Bray features in her lists of »extraordinary bursaries«
for the period 1538–1560.33 Yet there is one name in her list that
may still link Guy de Bre`s to the academy. Listed as bursary reci-
pient financed by the bailiff of Lausanne, there is a student who
went by the name Jeronime le Grand.34 He received financial aid
for the academic years 1557–58 and 1558–59, which corresponds

30 Pettegree et al., French Vernacular Books, vol. 1, no 9460–1.
31 On such sixteenth-century anthologies, see Anthony N.S. Lane, Justification in
Sixteenth-Century Patristic Anthologies, in: Auctoritas patrum: Contributions on the
Reception of the Church Fathers in the 15th and 16th Century, ed. Leif Grane et al.,
Mainz 1993 (Veröffentlichungen des Instituts für Europäische Geschichte Mainz, Bei-
heft 73), 69–95, which lists a total of 22 other anthologies published until 1565.

32 Henri Vuilleumier, Histoire de l’E´ glise re´forme´e du Pays de Vaud sous le re´gime

Bernois, vol. 4, Lausanne 1933, 523.

33 Karine Crousaz, L’Acade´mie de Lausanne entre Humanisme et Re´forme (ca.
1538–1560), Leiden/Boston 2012 (Education and Society in the Middle Ages and Re-
naissance 41), 518–527.

34 Crousaz, L’Acade´mie de Lausanne, 514.

86

Erik A. de Boer

precisely with the timeframe indicated by Crespin. Could this
name be an alias for Guy de Bre`s?

In his later years, de Bre`s is known to have used the name Au-
gustine du Mont, after the village of his birth, Mons or (in Dutch)
Bergen.35 Better known is the alias Jerom(m)e, which is mentioned
in various depositions taken from interrogated witnesses.36 While
De Bre`s’s use of the name Jerom(m)e is not well attested before
1561, it is entirely conceivable that Jerome or Jeronime – in Latin:
Hieronymus – was the name by which Guy de Bre`s went about as
one of the »heretical preachers« (prescheurs hereticques)37 who
was on the authorities’ »most wanted« list. Moreover, De Bre`s is
often described in various witness depositions as a man of »tall
stature« (hault de stature).38 When these details are put together,
there is some ground for suggesting that Guy de Bre`s may have
gone by the name of Jerome or Jeronime le Grand (i.e. the tall),
and already used that name during the years of his exile and per-
egrinatio in the German and Swiss territories.

Braekman suggests that Guy de Bre`s left Lausanne at the time of
Theodore Beza’s departure for Geneva, »and followed him to Ge-
neva in the autumn of 1558«.39 Tensions between Lausanne and
the Council of Bern caused all ministers in the Classis of Lausanne,
together with the professors of the Academy, to leave the city.
However, Beza’s teaching obligations only ended in November
1558.40 The split between the ministers of the Pays de Vaud and
the Council of Bern was finalized in the spring of 1559. In March
1559, a number of the ministers, among whom Barthe´lemy Caus-
se, the author of Le vray bouclier de la foy, arrived in Geneva »to
receive lodging until they are employed elsewhere«.41 To date,

35 Van Langenraad, Guido de Bray, 15; Eduard Poullet, Correspondance du Car-
dinal Granvelle 1565–1586, vol. 2, Brussels 1877–1882, 353; Emile Braekman, Guy de
Bre`s, vol. 1: Sa vie, Brussels 1960 (Collection Histoire du Protestantisme en Belgique et
au Congo Belge 6), 61.

36 Van Langenraad, Guido de Bray, 37–39, where he provides the testimony given
by Gilles Espringalles of 15 November 1561 (Papiers d’Etat, Correspondence de Tour-
nay, 1561–1563, 99r).

37 Van Langenraad, Guido de Bray, 37.
38 Van Langenraad, Guido de Bray, 39; cf. Braekman, Guy de Bre`s, 136.
39 Braekman, Les editions du »Baston de la foy chrestienne«, 323.
40 Alain Dufour, The´odore de Be`ze: Poe`te et the´ologien, Geneva 2006 (Cahiers

d’Humanisme et Renaissance 78), 59.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

87

scholars have been unable to establish a special connection be-
tween Beza and De Bre`s. Nor do we know when the latter left
Lausanne. Yet his contact with the Genevan team of publishers
(Barbier and Courteau) may already have begun while he was still
working in Lausanne.

Both the second and third editions of Le baston de la foy were
published by Nicolas Barbier and Thomas Courteau in 1558,
which Braekman has labeled BC 1558/1 and BC 1558/2, respec-
tively.42 The second edition closely followed the editio princeps,
and added some material here and there (e.g. on marriage, see
below §9). The third edition shows a more extensive reorganiza-
tion, and begins with three entirely new chapters. Chapter one is
»On God and the properties attributed to Him by Holy Scripture«
(p. 1–77), chapter two »On the properties of Christ« (p. 77–102),
and chapter three »The properties of the Holy Spirit which are
attributed to Him by Holy Scripture« (p. 102–112). The first chap-
ter opens with a presentation of the knowledge of God »by in-
spiration of nature«, as well as an introduction to the testimonies
from Holy Scripture which follow. This closely mirrors what De
Bre`s would go on to write in article two of the Belgic Confession.
The properties of God are presented by a multitude of quotations
from the Old and New Testaments, some of which are taken from
the apocryphal books. Chapter one closes with a discussion of the
unity of God and the properties that distinguish the three Persons.
This section mirrors much of what De Bre`s would write in article
eight and nine of his confession.

It is especially the addition of these three chapters to Le baston
late in 1558 which seems to reflect influence from Theodore Be-
za’s Confession de foi chrestienne, which was composed in 1558 in
Lausanne and appeared in 1559 in Geneva.43 A striking feature is
that Beza begins his confession with three chapters on Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit, a feature which De Bre`s introduced in the second

41 Ioannis Calvini Opera quae supersunt omnia, ed. Johann Wilhelm Baum et al.,

vol. 21, Braunschweig 1879 (Corpus Reformatorum 49), 712.

42 Braekman, Les editions du »Baston de la foy chrestienne«, 315–345.
43 Theodore Beza, Confession de foy chrestienne, [Geneva]: Conrad Badius, 1559,
written in 1558, cf. Fre´de´ric Gardy, Bibliographie des œuvres the´ologiques, litte´raires,
historiques et juridiques de The´odore de Be`ze, Geneva 1960 (Travaux d’Humanisme et
Renaissance 41), 60.

88

Erik A. de Boer

revision of Le baston in 1558. The Lausanne connection thus sug-
gests that there may at that time already have been contact be-
tween De Be`ze and De Bre`s, perhaps in the setting of the classroom
of that city’s academy prior to Beza’s move to Geneva.

6. Preparing for the »Confessio Belgica«?

What is true of Lausanne is even more so for Geneva: no docu-
mentation has been found in support of De Bre`s’s reported pre-
sence in the city or at the academy there, which opened its doors in
1559. The only evidence linking the author of Le baston de la foy
to Geneva is the publishing house of Nicolas Barbier and Thomas
Courteau, from whose presses (as noted above) the two editions
from 1558, as well as further editions from 1559, 1561, and 1565,
all appeared. Yet when Crespin noted that De Bre`s wrote the first
edition while in Ghent,44 and then travelled to Lausanne and later
also to Geneva, he did not comment on the later editions of Le
baston.

Two editions of Le baston, the second and third, thus appeared
in Geneva within the same year, 1558, and from the same publi-
shing house of Nicolas Barbier and Thomas Courteau.45 A fourth
edition came out in 1559. Could it be that De Bre`s himself was in
Geneva while these new editions were being prepared and printed?
As described above, the most striking difference between the two
revisions of 1558 is the addition of the three first chapters on the
Trinity. Also the fourth edition of 1559 shows the addition of
several chapters. The production of three revised editions, which
emerged from the same publishing house, thus suggests an intense
period of study on the part of Guy de Bre`s while he resided in the
cities of Lausanne and Geneva.

44 The title page has »A Lyon. Anno. 1555«, but this may have been chosen to divert
the Roman Catholic authorities. Suggestions for the place of publication include Ant-
werp, while for the printer Christopher Plantin has been proposed (cf. Braekman, Les
e´ditions du »Baston de la foy chrestienne«, 321–323).

45 Braekman, Les e´ditions du »Baston de la foy chrestienne«, 323–327; Gilmont,

Nouveau bilan bibliographique, 30, 32.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

89

But why would De Bre`s have another publisher produce a new
edition of his first theological work, rather than Jean Crespin?
Crespin, a learned and equally zealous editor, was De Bre`s’s first
connection to Geneva. Although Crespin’s name and printer’s
mark are not found on the editions of Le baston de la foy, it turns
out that he himself was the connection between De Bre`s and his
real publishers Barbier and Courteau. From 1554 to 1558 Crespin
associated himself with Nicolas Barbier, a printer who had come
from Lyon.46 Crespin’s bio-bibliographer, Jean-Franc¸ois Gilmont,
described the importance of this association »between a printer-
editor and a bookseller-editor« as follows.47 While Crespin took
care of the Latin editions, Barbier would publish the French trans-
lation of a work, as happened, for example, with John Calvin’s
lectures on the minor prophets (1559–60). In 1558 Barbier asso-
ciated himself with Thomas Courteau from the Picardy province.
Together this duo published works under their own name: »Chez
N. Barbier et Th. Courteau«. These books included reprints from
works which had earlier been published by Crespin. Barbier and
Courteau also acquired two bestsellers of their own: the illustrated
French Bible, and Guy de Bre`s’s Le baston de la foy.48 It is possible
that the acquisition of Le baston gave the Barbier-Courteau team a
certain amount of independence. Whatever the case may have
been, apart from the Genevan editions of Le baston there are no
other historical data placing De Bre`s in that city.

Guy de Bre`s’s marriage to Catharine Ramon is commonly used
in order to establish a terminus ad quem for his stay in Geneva.
Since the birth of their first son, Israel, dates to 31 August 1560,49
this suggests that their marriage took place at the very latest in
November 1559. This in turn corresponds with De Bre`s’s remark
in his farewell letter to his wife that »it pleased our good God to

46 On Nicolas Barbier, see Hans Joachim Bremme, Buchdrucker und Buchändler zur
Zeit der Glaubenskämpfe: Studien zur Genfer Druckgeschichte 1565–1580, Geneva
1969 (Travaux d’Humanisme et Renaissance 104), 108f.; on Thomas Courteau see
Bremme, Buchdrucker, 144f.

47 Gilmont, Jean Crespin, 91.
48 Gilmont, Jean Crespin, 93.
49 Van Langeraad, Guido de Bray, 97–103; Nicolaas H. Gootjes, The Belgic Con-
fession: Its History and Sources, Grand Rapids, MI 2007 (Texts and Studies in Refor-
mation and Post-Reformation Thought), 43–46.

90

Erik A. de Boer

allow us to live together for the time span of some seven years«.
Their marriage was blessed with five children.50 But where and
when Guy and Catharine met remains unknown.

It is fair to assume that there may be a connection between De
Bre`s’s continuing work on Le baston until the 1561 edition, and
his writing of Le confession de foy in 1561. Did he already con-
template the possibility of such a confession when he was in Ge-
neva? A century later, Martinus Schoock stated on the basis of
specific documents which are nevertheless unknown to us:

»Already in the year 1559 Guido de Bre`s, a most faithful man (verily, as
earlier he had opened up, he has sealed the truth of the Gospel by his
blood), foremost because the raving Anabaptists were regarded as being on
the same page as the Orthodox by the inquisitors, started to draw up some
articles of the orthodox unanimity.«51

Schoock did not specify what his documentary basis for this claim
was, and it has since been rejected by Van Langeraad and Goot-
jes.52 It is quite possible that Schoock mistook De Bre`s’s continuing
work on Le baston, especially during his time in Geneva, for his
work on a confession. Le baston, »which has been faithfully de-
rived from the very books of the ancient teachers«, is preceded by
the dedicatory epistle to the church of L[ille]. The author wrote:
»When I offer the present book (in which nothing is from me, but
everything from the Fathers) as a confession of my faith (pour
confession de ma foy) to the enemies of the Fathers, I do not doubt
that one day I will be condemned as a wicked heretic to be burned
alive to ashes«.53

Even if Schoock confused De Bre`s’s work on Le Baston with his
preparations for the confession, his mention of the year 1559 calls
to mind the drafting of the Confession de Paris, for which John
Calvin in Geneva was asked to send a contribution that year.54

50 De Bre`s, Procedures tenues, in: Pijper, Bibliotheca Reformatoria Neerlandica, vol.

8, 624; Braekman, Guy de Bres, vol 1: Sa vie, 118.

51 Marten Schoock, Liber de bonis vulgo ecclesiasticis dictis, Groningen: Nicolai,
1651, 519–522, printed also in Van Langeraad, Guido de Bray, 97f.; Gootjes, The
Belgic Confession, 213f.

52 Van Langeraad, Guido de Bray, 47.
53 De Bre`s, Le baston de la foy (1555), 7.
54 See Erik A. de Boer, Confession de Foy, faite d’un commun accord par les Fran-

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

91

After all, it is possible that De Bre`s was in Geneva during those
days and became aware of the need for a confession for the Re-
formed churches in the Netherlands as they lived under Spanish
rule. In that sense, his continuing work on Le baston can be re-
garded as his preparation (albeit perhaps unconscious) for the
composition of the Confessio Belgica.

7. Vir trilinguis

Having upgraded his theological skills in Lausanne and Geneva,
De Bre`s returned to active duty and served as itinerant preacher to
several congregations in northern France and the southern Low
Countries. Although some ten other editions of Le baston would
later appear, no substantial further revision took place in any of
them. To assess De Bre`s’s theological development it may be
worthwhile first to depict him as he was at the end of his life, as a
mature theologian. The very last documents testifying to De Bre`s’s
patristic learning are found in the letters he wrote from prison to
his flock in Valenciennes. Two long letters read as a verbal report
of the interrogation carried out on 16 and 17 May 1567 by a
Franciscan monk, and on 22 May by the bishop of Arras, Franc¸ois
Richardot.

Although he apparently had no reference books available to him,
Guy de Bre`s was able to dispute detailed points of doctrine and to
quote from memory. He refers expressly to the De cura pro mor-
tuis agenda of Augustine, where the church father speaks of his
mother Monica’s inability to help him after her death.55 Another
point: »How the doctors of the Church are united, consecrating
bread and wine against the bearing of the words of the Lord Jesus,
one can see in the words of Scholasticus, who made a canon and
lived around the time of Gregory«.56 This is followed by a discus-

c¸ois qui desirent vivre selon la purete´ de l’Evangile de nostre Seigneur Iesu-Christ –
1559, in: Confessies: Gereformeerde geloofsverantwoording in zestiende-eeuws Europa,
ed. M. te Velde, Heerenveen 2009, 353–394.

55 De Bre`s, Procedures tenues, in Pijper, Bibliotheca Reformatoria Neerlandica, vol.

8, 503.

56 Ibid., 509

92

Erik A. de Boer

sion of the meaning of the Latin and Greek terms, with reference
to Erasmus’s Annotationes. Also Peter Lombard and Peter Comes-
ter, John Duns Scotus (»in sententia II, lib. 4, quest. 3«) and Ga-
briel Biel (In canone missae, lect. 40) are referred to. There is thus
good reason to trace De Bre`s’s references and to investigate his
quotes from the fathers and doctors of the church. After all, a
comparison with his »database«, Le baston de la foy, may provide
insight into the development of his learning.

The texts of the interrogations, published shortly after Guy de
Bre`s and his colleague Pe´re´grin de la Grange were executed, re-
mind us of the confiscation of De Bre`s’s papers in 1561. When the
Reformed citizens of Doornik publicly protested by marching
through the streets while singing Psalms (les chanteries), the go-
verness Margaret of Parma sent a committee to the city to inves-
tigate these events. The committee reported to the governess that a
bundle of papers had been thrown over the castle wall, containing
a letter and a confession. Concerning this letter they report: »Fi-
nally, they quote several lines in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, taken
from Scripture.«57 Thus, the end of the letter which accompanied
the Belgic Confession as an introduction ended with quotations
taken from the Bible in the three languages of the original Scrip-
tures and the ecclesiastical translation. When the confiscated let-
ters were compared, the following investigation proved that the
handwriting of the letter accompanying the confession was that of
Guy de Bre`s. The Bible verses in the three languages were therefore
also in his handwriting. That he could write in these languages
should not surprise us, because the inventory of confiscated books
mentions various books »in French and in Latin, with some books
in Greek«.58

Crespin reported that Guy de Bre`s had travelled to Lausanne
and Geneva in 1557–1558 »to learn Latin« (and, perhaps, the
biblical languages). Only four years later, in 1561, the man who
wrote the famous Confession de foy appears to have had a wor-
king knowledge of the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin languages. After
his return from Geneva, De Bre`s adopted a false name for his

57 The text of this report from 2 November 1561 is included in: Gootjes, The Belgic

Confession, 191.

58 Gootjes, The Belgic Confession, 15, 50, 197.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

93

ministry in visiting the towns and villages of south-west Belgium.
That name was Jerome. This was also the name of one of his
brothers. But could De Bre`s also have decided upon it in an allu-
sion to »Hierosme, prestre docteur Latin (†422)«, who is listed as
one of his sources and authorities in Le baston de la foy? Hiero-
nymus, or Jerome, was after all the true vir trilinguis, the great
church father and biblical scholar who learned the biblical lan-
guages and composed the Vulgate.59 The very fact that, contrary to
the other preachers of the southern Low Countries, Guy de Bre`s is
not known to have followed any ecclesiastical or academic for-
mation before his turn to the Reformed cause, lends credence to
the reports of his »peregrinatio academica« to Lausanne and Ge-
neva and of his pursuit to study languages there60.

8. Towards a critical edition

The development of Guy de Bre`s’s Le baston de la foy chrestienne
has never been studied in depth. A critical edition is now being
prepared by the present author in cooperation with W.H.Th.
Moehn and A.J. Kunz. This team intends to produce a digital
edition (a) comparing the first edition and the Genevan editions of
1558/1–2, 1559, 1561, and 1565, (b) compiling a database of the
church fathers, councils, and canons quoted, and (c) providing
source references to sixteenth-century and modern editions. On the
basis of this research, solutions may be found to answer the ques-
tion how De Bre`s acquired his patristic expertise over the years.61

59 Cf. the telling title of Dennis Brown, Vir trilinguis: A Study in the Biblical Ex-

egesis of Saint Jerome, Kampen 1992.

60 On his teachers in polemic against the Anabaptists he wrote: »Je ne veux taire
aussi que je me suis grandement servi en cette oeuvre du labeur des saints personnages
qui ont e´crit contre ceste secte de notre temps, comme de ce grand serviteur de Dieu, feu
de bonne et heureuse me´moire Maıˆtre Jean Calvin, Jean Alasko, Henri Bullinger, Mar-
tin Micron, a` la moisson desquels j’ai comme recueillie les e´spics apre`s eux, pour servir
aussi selon mon petit pouvoir a` notre Seigneur, m’employant alle`grement a` offrir ce peu
que je puis« (Guy de Bre`s, La racine, source et fondement des anabaptistes ou rebap-
tisez de nostre temps. Avec tresample refutation des arguments principaux, par lesquels
ils ont accoustume´ de troubler l’Eglise de nostre Seigneur Jesus Christ, et seduire les
simples. Le tout reduict en trois livres, [Rouen]: Abel Cle´mence, 1565, 4).

61 Samples of such research can be found in Erik A. de Boer, The Articles on Scrip-

94

Erik A. de Boer

There is one intriguing question in particular that begs for an
answer: if De Bre`s had no command of Latin when he wrote his
French language anthology in 1555, where did he find all these
translated quotations? One of the earliest patristic anthologies, the
Unio dissidentium by Hermannus Bodius (1527), had already been
published in French translation in 1527–1528 by Martin Lempe-
reur in Antwerp: L’Union de toutes discordes, qui est un livre tres
utile a` tous amateurs de paix et de unite´, extraict des principaulx
docteurs de l’eglise chrestienne.62 Further editions we have been
able to identify were published by Pierre de Vingle (1533), Jean
Michel (1539), and Philibert Hamelin (1551) in Geneva. De Bre`s’s
work resembles that of Bodius in at least one important respect:
every passage within a chapter begins with several quotes from
Scripture on the doctrinal or ethical theme, followed by quotations
from church fathers, using the systems of division found in the
Latin editions of the sixteenth century.

Other sources of patristic facts and quotes can be identified by a
careful reading of De Bre`s’s texts. The following, concluding part
of this essay provides a sample from our quest to track down the
sources of De Bre`s’s early knowledge of the patres.

9. A sample: De Bre`s on marriage

For the purposes of this article, we have chosen one of the smaller
chapters in Le baston to illustrate our quest for its sources. The
choice is as such random, although the theme ties in nicely with the
story of De Bre`s’s life. As we saw, after he left Geneva and headed

ture in the Confessio Belgica and in »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«, in: Beck et al.,
The Belgic Confession at 450, 105–122; Erik de Boer, Meester in de martial arts: De
Bres’ gebruik van de patres in »Le baston« en de »Confessio Belgica« over de doop, in:
Geloofstaal trekt haar spoor: 450 Jaar Nederlandse Geloofsbelijdenis, ed. Frank van der
Pol, Utrecht 2012, 153–161; Erik A. de Boer, Het offer van het lam: Het schriftberoep
van Guido de Bres in artikel 34 van de Nederlandse geloofsbelijdenis, in: van der Pol,
Geloofstaal trekt haar spoor, 162–172; Erik A. de Boer, De katholieke ecclesiologie van
de »Confessio Belgica« in het licht van »Le baston de la foy«, in: Theologia Reformata
55/3 (2012), 264–277.

62 For a description of the early editions, see Francis M. Higman, Piety and the
People: Religious Printing in French, 1511–1551, Aldershot 1996 (St. Andrews Studies
in Reformation History), nos. B 211–216.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

95

for home, he married Catharine Ramon. So what were his
thoughts on the marriage of a pastor or priest? De Bre`s chose to
write on the topic of marriage when he was still a bachelor, and he
treated it in a chapter entitled »Du marriage et des vo[e]ux« (1555,
f. 128v–134v), although it is in fact followed by a distinct chapter
on vows. The second edition corrected this error in the title
(1558/1, p. 212). The quotation of Bible verses on marriage in the
first edition was restricted to 1 Timothy 4:1–3 and Matthew
19:4–6, cited at the beginning of the chapter. In the margin De
Bre`s also added references to Genesis 1 and 2, to Ephesians 5, and
to 1 Corinthians 6. Later on in this chapter he also supplied long
quotations from 1 Corinthians 7.

In the second edition, ten quotations – two from Genesis, and
eight from the New Testament – are brought together and printed
in full at the beginning of the chapter. Four later references from
the 1555 edition are deleted in the 1558/1 edition. That section
had originally read:

»Solomon describes the praise of marriage, Proverbs 18.
David describes God’s blessing of married people, Psalm 128.
The angel Raphael teaches Tobias how he should marry according

to God[’s command].

The confirmation of marriage is found in Genesis 9« (f. 129v).

Having deleted these lines, De Bre`s also reordered his quotations
from the church fathers. In the second revision which he under-
took in 1558, he pushed the chapters on marriage, vows, and fas-
ting towards the end of the book. The contents of the chapter on
marriage, however, remained the same (1558/2, p. 402–409). After
the second revision of 1558, the place and contents of this chapter
were not revised again (1559–1565).

Having described the process of redaction in the chapter on mar-
riage across the first editions of Le Baston, we now turn to ex-
amine the contents of the patristic quotations. The chapter con-
stitutes a powerful defence of marriage, also for those who serve in
the ministry of the Word. From Eusebius’s Histoire ecclesiastique,
De Bre`s used a passage from Clement of Alexandria on the apost-
les who travelled with their spouses. He further reads St. Paul’s
address to his suzugos in Philippians 4 as a reference to his wife.63

96

Erik A. de Boer

At two points De Bre`s introduces a quotation, and both times his
text can easily be traced back to the French translation of Euse-
bius’s Histoire eccle´siastique in the edition from Martin Lempereur
(Merten de Keyser).64

The passage on the married apostles is followed by a reference to
»Au quart des sentences« (i.e. book four of Peter Lombard’s Sen-
tences) which shows itself to have been taken and copied from a
marginal reference in Calvin’s Institution de la religion chrestien-
ne.65

An examination of the remaining references reveals that De Bre`s

further used three historical works:

– The Historia tripartita, which is a sixth-century compilation
by Cassiodorus of the three church histories of Eusebius, So-
zomen, and Theodoret from the fourth and fifth century.

– His source for the life of Sylvester I (pope, 314–335) is Bar-
tolomeus Platina (Bartolomeo Sacchi, 1421–1481), Liber de
vita Christi et omnium pontificum.66

– The chapter on marriage closes with a quotation from the
work of the historiographer Jean le Maire de Belges, Traicte´ de
la diffe´rence des schismes et des conciles de l’E´ glise.67

The Historia tripartita was not translated into French until 1578.
However, Eusebius’s Histoire ecclesiastique in French translation
was published in 1532, with editions produced in Antwerp by

63 Eusebius, Historia ecclesiastica III 30.1; De Bre`s, Le baston de la foy (1555),

129v–130r.

64 Eusebius, L’histoire eccle´siastique (transl. Claude de Seyssel), Antwerp 1533, 76r
(book III, chapter xxvii as indicated also in De Bre`s, Le baston de la foy [1555], 129v).
65 De Bre`s, Le baston de la foy (1555), 130r: »Au quart des sentences, distinction
17, Chapi[tre] 4 et au decret 27, question 2, Chapi[tre] qui se commence ›Cum socie-
tas‹«; cf. Jean Calvin, Institution de la religion chre´tienne (1541), ed. Olivier Millet,
Geneva 2008 (Textes litte´raires franc¸ais 598), 1476: »au quart des sen. Dist. 27 c. 4 et
au decret 27 c. 2 c. Cum societas«.

66 Modern edition: Bartolomeo Platina, Liber de vita Christi et omnium pontificum,

ed. Giacinto Gaida, Cita` di Castello 1913–1932.

67 Modern edition: Jean Lemaire de Belges, Traicte´ de la diffe´rence des schismes et
des conciles de l’E´ glise avec l’Histoire du Prince Sophy et autres oeuvres, ed. Jennifer
Britnell, Geneva 1997 (Textes litte´raires franc¸ais), 170; also p. 237 (»roy Loys le Bes-
que«); cf. Sacrorum conciliorum nova et amplissima collectio, ed. Giovanni Domenico
Mansi, vol. 18, 121f. For a description of the editions of the »Traicte´«, printed from
1511 to 1549, see Lemaire de Belges, Traicte´, ed. Jennifer Britnell, 58–69.

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

97

Merten de Keyser (1533), who also published Bodius’s L’union de
toutes discordes, and in Paris by Vivant Gaulterot (1540), the pu-
blisher of De Bre`s’s antagonist Nicole Grenier.68 The work of Pla-
tina was published in French as Les vies, faictz et gestes des sainctz
peres papes, empereurs et roys de France, and saw many editions
between 1540 and 1551 produced in Paris.69

An intriguing reference, already found in the first edition of
1555, is the very last one to »St. Uldaric, bishop of Augsburg, in
the letter which he sent to Nicolas I regarding the prohibition on
marriage for priests«. Ulrich of Augsburg, however, lived from c.
890 to 973, whereas pope Nicolas I lived from c. 820 to 867. The
first thus cannot have addressed a letter to the second, who had
died decades before his birth. De Bre`s quoted at some length from
this letter in which Ulrich, as he understood it, reproached the
pope for prohibiting marriage for the clergy since it went »com-
pletely against the Word of God, the decisions of the Council of
Nicaea, and the ancient church«. The author tells the story of Pope
Gregory I who was forced to change his mind on the matter. For,
on a fishing trip he is said to have seen six thousands heads of little
children, tossed into the river after their illegitimate birth. The
shock of this event caused Gregory to change his mind and to
permit his priests to marry. De Bre`s brings this »coup de graˆce« of
his argument to a close as follows: »This Epistle has been found in
a library in a town in Holland called Aldwater«70. The Epistola
divi Hulderichi Augustinensis Episcopi, adversus constitutionem
de Cleri Coelibatum, plane referens Apostolicum Spiritum had
been published in Wittenberg in 1520, with a preface by Martin
Luther.71 At the end of the pamphlet, we also find the very same
line on the origin of the manuscript, which De Bre`s quoted in
French in Le Baston.72 Apparently he was struck by the thought

68 Pettegree et al., French Vernacular Books, vol. 1, 566.
69 Pettegree et al., French Vernacular Books, vol. 2, 573–574.
70 De Bre`s, Le baston de la foy (1555), 134r-v.
71 D. Martin Luthers Werke: Kritische Gesamtausgabe (Weimarer Ausgabe), Brief-

wechsel vol. 12, no. 4217, 22 (n. 2).

72 »Inventa est haec Epistola, in quadam Bibliotheca opidi veteris aquae Germanicae
Aldwater in Hollandia Inferioris Germaniae provincia« (Epistola divi Hulderichi Au-
gustinensis Episcopi, adversus constitutionem de Cleri Coelibatum, plane referens
Apostolicum Spiritum [Wittenberg 1520], f. Aiiiiv). Aldwater seems to refer to Aduard

98

Erik A. de Boer

that this pamphlet could be verified as »ex antiqua codice excerp-
ta« (as Luther had said in his preface) from somewhere in the Low
Countries.

Whether De Bre`s used the Wittenberg edition or found a French
translation elsewhere is not known, but the contents of the pam-
phlet in any case feature throughout his chapter on marriage in Le
Baston. The following facts from early church history are found
both in the pamphlet as well as in De Bre`s’s chapter on marriage:
the reference to Pope Sylvester, and another to the second book of
the Historia tripartita (on the decision of the Council of Nicaea
forbidding priests to marry, and the forceful reaction of Paphnu-
tius, bishop of Egypt). The account regarding Pope Gregory I and
his shock upon seeing so many dead babies ends in Le baston with
the following words: »The Apostle said: It is better to marry than
to burn. And I for my part say: it is better to marry than to create a
reason for murdering« (illegitimate children). The same lines are
found in the same place in the Epistola.73

In the short chapter on marriage, we thus find evidence for De
Bre`s using four French language sources on theology and history:
Calvin’s Institution de la religion chrestienne, Jean le Maire’s
Traicte´, the translation of Eusebius’s Historia ecclesiastica, and
Platina’s Les vies. The quest to uncover De Bre`s’s sources conti-
nues, however. One important question, especially relevant for the
1555 edition of Le baston, is this: does Crespin’s remark that De
Bre`s went to Lausanne and Geneva in order to study Latin imply
that he knew no Latin prior to that time, and therefore had to rely
on French language sources? If this was indeed the case, he must
have used intermediate sources which provided him with French
language quotes from books that had only been published in Latin.
Comparison of the further editions of Le baston may allow us to
uncover whether De Bre`s learned to handle Latin sources, or else

(close to Groningen) with its Benedictine abbey. I thank Wim Moehn for identifying
this reference to the »Epistola«.

73 »L’Apostre a dit, il vaut mieux se marier que brusler; et je dy aussi de ma part,
qu’il vaut mieux se marier, que bailler occasion de mort« (De Bre`s, Le baston de la foy
[1555], 134r). Cf. »Apostolicum illud laudavit consilium: Melius est nubere quam uri;
addens ex sui parte: Melius est nubere quem mortis occasionem prebere« (Epistola divi
Hulderichi [...], f. Aiiir).

Guy de Bre`s’s »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«

99

relied on quotations which he found in other standard reference
works.

Erik A. de Boer, Prof. Dr. theol., Theologische Universiteit Kampen, the Netherlands;
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Free State University Bloemfontein,
South Africa

Abstract: Guy de Bre`s, who would become the author of the »Confessio Belgica«,
published his first work in 1555, »Le baston de la foy chrestienne«, a florilegium of
quotes from the Bible and the Church Fathers, that was intended as a guide for the
faithful who were engaged in dispute over Reformed doctrine. De Bre`s, a preacher in
the South of the Low Countries, travelled to Lausanne and Geneva (1556–1559) to
further study theology and improve his Latin. The connection between his studies at
both institutions, his work on three more editions of his book, and the sources of his
patristic knowledge are discussed. A critical edition of his work, that preceded the
composition of the Belgic Confession, is being prepared.

Keywords: Guy de Bre`s, The´odore de Be`ze, Jean Calvin, Confessio Belgica, Acade´mie de
Lausanne, Acade´mie de Gene`ve

