Research  Report  and  Addenda  to  Heinrich  Bullinger 

Bibliographie,  Band  I: 

Books  by  Bullinger  in  the  Rare  Book  Collection  of  Union 

Theological  Seminary 

by  PAMELA  BIEL 

The  bibliography  of  Bullinger's  works  compiled  by Joachim  Staedtke  is  an  in-
valuable  tool for any Student  of the  Swiss Reformation.  In  the  following  report  I 
have  noted  five  books printed  in  the  sixteenth  Century which  are to be  found  in 
New York  City in  the  Rare  Book  Reading  Room  of  the  Burke  Library of  Union 
Theological  Seminary  which  are  not  listed  as  precisely  as  they  might  be  in 
Staedtke's  work.  With  the  exception  of  the  first  entry,  an  edition  completely 
unknown  to  Staedtke  of  a crucial  early  text  by  Bullinger,  these  addenda  are  mi(cid:173)
nor and  are offered  here  for the Information  of those who  might undertake  Bul(cid:173)
linger  research  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic. 

crniittcfieö erttwtett  Qkt? 
K* 2lllmc#ttfc«/itt einer fem««« 

Irefünhenfi&lm 

täte» 

fptctinn  ftwfttt  ft'tfom ä-> 
Ucfütcbeteii (Bortee/vn <ük wunder; 
teeret  9ic er fincr  iEvbrftiofifcfFi  tf«j)?ii  (wr: 
Oudf tricl'y ( 5 «r nän- kirnen / vnb  iritwiiirib 

mige  in einige? Ft t umen. (Beftfcribcii  ;ü 

ßürem ctrtcr foblicfccnlEyiS* 

gnofäiftt. 

2L<fft bi$ nütVttwü\i$ma$en:lii: 

se(cid:173)
ntit ernfl ftg an $aociiS / es wirr >i.£ 

ßttüßtob nir  tfcriiwriT. 

ANNO  M-.  V. 

'JH. 

315 

1) See illustration  of  title page. Foliated A-B  (1-8), C (1-10), with  marginalia. 
This  edition  of  BuUinger's  Anklage  und  ernstliches Ermahnen  Gottes appears  to 
be  unknown  to  Staedtke.  Particularly  interesting  is the  appearance  of  the  date, 
1528, on  the  title  page printed  in  a different  fönt  than  the  rest  of  the  book.  The 
National  Union  Catalogue  of pre-1956  Imprints  (hence  NUC)  lists  this  book 
correctly  as  being  in  the  Burke  Library's  collection,  in  volume  17,  page  219. 
2) Staedtke  #  69,  Praefatio  in  opus articulorum  Zwinglii,  is at  the  Burke  Li(cid:173)
brary  as  a  part  of  the  S. M. Jackson  collection,  which  has  not  yet  been  cata-
logued.  This  book  does  not  appear  in  the  NUC  as being  at  Union  Theological 
Seminary  although  a listing  is given  for  Duke  University,  in  volume  685, page 
833. 

3) Staedtke  #  247, an  edition  of  Die  rechten Opfer der  Christenheit, is  at  the 

Burke  Library  and  is listed  as  so  in  the  NUC, volume  85, page  33. 

4)  Staedtke  #  268, an  edition  of  Von  heiligen Nachtmal,  is  at  the  Burke  Li(cid:173)
brary  and  appears  correctly  in  the  NUC, volume  85, page  35. The  slightly  later 
edition,  #  269, which  Staedtke  lists at Union  Theological  Seminary, is not  to be 
found  there. 

5) Staedtke  #  575, an  edition  of  Von der schweren Verfolgung der christlichen 

Kirche, is at the  Burke  Library, although  Staedtke  does not  list  it there. It  is cor(cid:173)
rectly  described  in  the  NUC, volume  84, page  35. 

The  examination  of  the  books  described  above  was  greatly  facilitated  by 
Kirk  Moll who  made  numerous  trips to the  "Tower", and  by John  Cox, who  pa-
tiently  described  the  minutiae  of  the  bibliographic  science  to  a very  slow  learn-
er.  Both  men  are  members  of  the  staff  of  the  Burke  Library. 

Pamela Biel, Department  of Religion, 
Columbia  University, New York, N.Y. 10027, USA 

316 

