l ä y i ^ J S ^ S ä c ^ S ^ il 
A P O D I X IS 

C A P IT  V  M ,  S E V 

A R T I C Y L O R VM 

S I N G V L A R VM  C O N F E S S I O N VM  H A R M O N I i, 

V TI 

I L LA 

I N T E K. 
refyondenr. 

SE  S I BI 

H E L V E T I . | H £ I V t T I - | B A S I U E N - B O H E M I - J G A L L I C Ä | A N G L l C jE 
»prior« 
Artiadi*7>\C*pits 

jg,  Articuti  U^Cmpit*  jf.\AtticMl$40.\Artmäi 

ccpofttriorif  lit. 

ex 

I 

I 

JI. 

B E 1 G I C*  AVGVSTA-iSAXON  I-

Jrtktdi37.\& 

d e A b u f -i j A r t i a d i i *.  C j g M i j - J ^g 

MMU.IIH.  1 Mt. 

De  Scribtw*]*crm,veT9  Dei  V*rb*t& 

Tr*Mtiombmbum*!tü. 

l x . $ I . 8 c j . 4f 

I. 

lu.lll.nii.  »| 

ix. 

I ii- S- 

tin.m.l 

, l. $.1.1-3.4-

S E C T IO 

P R I M A. 

S E C T IO 

I I.  De  De»  Ejfenüä  vm 

, ferfinis 

trmwerfyue 

v?.&ki.$Jiii.|  iii.iiii-v.  Ji.J.j.  & *,$.)  m . & i v i i . $ .|  Mt-$xvL  & l  1. n.  m.  &(  1.11.& vni.ixl 
I x.xi.&xxvi.j 
I 
I 

|{.&xi.$.i.i.  11.1.&4.&«.  xix.&xxuu-  I  XVIL 
| 

J vfque  ad fin. I $.1.1. 

I 
| 

1 

L&XXI. 

emt  ctdtu. 
xxu. 

I 
I 
f 

1 XXX.&XXX1" 

XXXI11I. 

|  I L $ . I Ä: 
I  XX11. 

S E C T IO 

I I I.  D* utrtim  *>«  Prowdtnti*>&  muHth  Creatione. 

I  VI.VJI. 
' 

li.f,.a,&in. 
I 

t 
I 

I  U.$-I.TII 
I  » i n. 

I 
| 

u . $ . i . & x u .| 
I  xin. 
j 

I 
I 

j 
I 

S E C T IO 

I U I. 

De  hominis  Lsf>fu,Pecc*t9,&  Ubero  Arbitrio. 

i i x. 

|  vm.ix. 
| 

I 
\ 

IL 

I im.j$.t.iJ  \j  I  ix.x.xi. 
I *i  i4.adi?.  I 

| 
| 

xvtn-$.i. 

|  xim.x?. 
| 

I 
I 

ii.&xviu.  I  i.i$.*.adfia.t 
xix. 
|  n . £ i m . f c x| 

S E C T IO 

V. 

De  uernm 

PredeßinMione. 

S E C T IO 
XI. 

X.  XI. 

V I.  DerepmrmtkneItffusbeminis 

1 im.  &  ix. 

1 

vlqucxdfine  Ixvi&xvii. 
ca-& vi.i$.i.  1 
«1  7-*  i  17-  1 
ad 
finem.  1 

_L 

perCbrtftuMjeqnehumtPerfin.N*tur.Ofßc.&oper&fedemptimü. 

II. 4:  xvm.J. 
i.&xix.& 
XXI. 

XVII.  XVI  IL 
XIX.  XX.  & 
XXXV11. 

IU. Sc XVII. 

in.  J.  18.  I?. 
lO.il. 

IL 

i 5 . w d ß-
ncin. 

I  Ubxiir. 

/ 

I 

x. 

S E C T IO 
I  xxili. 

V I I.  DeLe^tt 
| 
| 

&EHMnetlu>. 
« *• 

1 

I m.  $.  xi.*j.J  « . & » m.  I 

S E C T IO 

V I I I. 

De  P*nitentia,& 

Conuerfiont  Hominis. 

<i.x».  & <le|iii.$.H.i£. 
I XVI.XVH. 

|  jbuC m. 

|ril.xin.xll»l 
1  xv- 

1 

«• 
,  • 

S E C T IO 

I X.  Deittßificstieneperfidemje'^ue 

kenis»pertemt,& 

vi. J. t. 8c  i $.  Ixvm.  &  xx. 
7.1^17. Jtera 

«tl.xxii. 

eernmpremm. 

m.a $.1 .ad 18. |  v. St vii. 
&a$.i6.adtf| 
ic  v. vLvii.  I 
vm.  ix. 
I 

• 

| m- *»i. v. vi. 

I 
I 
1 

v.J.. 

S E C T IO 
|  XVII.&  XXVI.| 

X. 

HU. 

DcEccUfiaCoiholK*. 
I  x x v i i . x x m i .1 

T U. 

ti  XXVIII. 

x x , x. 

S E C T I O. 

X I.  De  Mmißrit  Eccteß*,eonimqme  vocamne,& 

offici^. 

XV.  XV1.XTII.I 
xviii.x». &r 
cmfJeni  de-  I 
claratioac. 
| 

XX.& ClIKdc- I 
ehr 

v.$.t. 

IX.&XIIIL  JXXV._&XXIX. .  V.VkVU.  I XXX. XXXI. 

Ixxx.  xxxi. 
I 
j 

I 
I 
I 

I 
1 
| 

IXllU.&dcA-
|bu£  vji-jji. 
ladp.&ij-i*. 
|adi?.itt  J.16 

| 

I 

S E C T IO 

11. 

X 1 1.  De  verit,&fdßi 
I xxxuiLxxxv. 1 
x. 

Sacramsntü 
|  xxxui. 

ingenert. 
| vm.  3c  XIII.  I 

I 

f 

I

II 

S E C T IO 

X I IL 11. 
r. 

I Def*criB*füfi*Mtü 
I 

XL 5.1. 

I  XXX1III. 

Stcrmmento. 
IX. 

I 

xxi. & ejoi 
| 
dcclarationr. I 

I  v.J.1.8.  xi. 
! 

J.i. 

xxu.  tt  eil» j xxi. 
Accbtnioae. 

m u.  xxiiu.lxxii.xxui.6 

xni. 

| 
I 
t 

S E C T IO 
I I. 

fxiii-&xix.$.  I x.n.ab iniüo 1 xnt. 
f 

v(qucad$.vl.[ 

S E C T IO 

DeficraDeminiCaM. 

X I I I I. 
txixvi.xxivu 
IxvxviU.  poA  |tium.xiu. 
I 

xu  .poltiai.  I 
I 
1 

inibum. 

I 

xxxv. 

ix.&de  Abu •  x i m.  abini-| 
1  tio&ifi$.4.l 
liibj.n. 
I 
I  xdti.itcmxT.| 

X V.  De  CeetAm  Eccltß*5Heis><&  $ut  in  iüfieri 
txxmi$-i. 
t  x x u u $ i. 

xvi- 

] 
j 

I 

| 

jxiiii.ifi.J.i.l  xi.J.vl.Srxvi. 

Meant. 
H U I .i  fi.J.i.l  xi.$.vl.3fxvi.  j 
'f(JUC4d4,it€i  4:  xviu.  &  J 
J 
;xi.$  10.11.ul  xivtl. 

S E C T IO 

X V I.  DfferÜs,lewtiüstyißt*tmre 

|xxiiii.xtv.f.j  v.J.j.8c x.J.i.J  xv.J.j.&xvii.|'xxmj.J.vlt.  1  x nm 
| d o J i x x u. 

|  1.&4- 

M J & I Ä: 
I  xvai. 

I 
I 

f 

frrer%mi& 
» 

cur* 

nurtuemm. 

( dcAbuIjiui.|  xix.5  1.3.4.  | xvn.3; xxu.  ivii.vm.ixjc* 
I 
1 

&xxim.xxv.( 
/ A;xxyin.xxi*j 

xx.$.i.i. 

| 

| 

l 

S E C T IO 

X V I 1.  De  Ceremomis,& 

Ixv.i5,1. adf. 1 XXXU.XXXUI.I 
I*.  i6jdfi.vl-| 

xv. 

ruAw 
1 

xxxit. 

AiutphtrüÄngenere. 

> xv.&  vu.uc  ! u u i $. J.adfi.  I  xxxv. 
I Ab«T.i5.p.ad 

1 

x m i. 

S E C T IO 

X V I I I.  De  ceniugu,  &  Cetl&ttu+lupiu* 

i x . J . 7 A x u| 
I 

v m. 

I 
I 

SECTIO  XIX.  De  M*imr*t*fA*k: 

vtis 
|  v.vi^lcAbui.  I 
I 

Men*ßkü. 
|  xvm.&xxi.i|xxi.  & xxvi.  | 
I n.^i".  I 

I

XXVI. 

J 

XXX. 

| v t I . & X l . $ . l -J 

XVI. 

IXXXIX. X I. 

I 

I  XXXVI. 

Atttni*L*Uer,C*p*afimArtkidoi^dwfiuStB%entt^intotUM&t9XfWtpm 

fiHfsttiMTHfth'jHibusfinj'ult  Artjnfm 

Conftfiämegris  dißfngknrttitT;ttfüUe 

nnUü mtm?tr 

rtftTitrü, 

Z W I N G L I A NA 

BEITRÄGE  ZUR  G E S C H I C H TE  ZWINGLIS 

DER  REFORMATION  U ND  DES  PROTESTANTISMUS 

IN  DER  S C H W E IZ 

HERAUSGEGEBEN  VOM  ZWINGLIVEREIN 

1984/2 

BAND XVI /  HEFT 4 

Freedom  in  reformed  confessions  of  the  16th  Century 

(The  "Harmonia  confessionum  fidei"  of  1581)* 

by  FRITZ  BÜSSER 

I. 

To  introduce  my  subject,  let  me  make  some  personal  remarks  with  regard  to 
the  topic  of  my lecture. The  proposal  for  a paper  on  the  subject  of  "Freedom  in 
reformed  confessions  of  the  16th Century" which  I submitted  to the  Preparatory 
Committee, was the  result  of  a simple  consideration: If "the  freedom  of a Chris(cid:173)
tian" is the  main  theme  of  Reformation,  then  this  must  also  be  manifest  in  the 
reformed  confessions.  Studying  the  sources  and  the  rather  sparse  secondary  lit-
erature  -  sparse  in  comparison  for  instance  with  the  "superabundantia"  of  the 
efforts  concerning  the  "Confessio  Augustana"  and  the  "Book  of  Concord"  -,  I 
made  soon  a  discovery  which  fascinated  me  more  and  more. All  my  scholarly 
efforts,  all  my  roads  did  not  lead  me  to  Rome,  but  to  a  book,  which  was  pub-
lished  at  Geneva  in  August  1581: Salvard's  "Harmonia  confessionum  fidei". 

I  found  the  first  reference  to  this  work  in  Philip  Schaffs  survey  of  "The 

Creeds  of  the  Evangelical  reformed  Churches": 

"This (harmonia) is the first  attempt at comparative  Dogmatics or  Symbolics. 
It grew  out  of  a desire  for  one  common  Creed, which  was modified  into  the 
idea  of  a selected  harmony.  In  this  shape  it was  proposed  by  the  Protestants 
of  Zürich  and  Geneva, entrusted  to  Beza, Daneau, and  Salnar (or  Salnard,  or 
Salvart,  minister  of  the  Church  of  Castres), and  chiefly  executed  by  the  last 

Paper presented to the "Commission  Internationale de l'Histoire  Ecclesiastique Com-
paree" (CIHEC), British  Subcommission. Third Colloquium, Durham  GB, 6 Septem(cid:173)
ber  1981, Translated  by Mrs Ruth  Müller. 

281 

of  the  three.  It  was  intended  as a defense  of  Protestant,  and  particularly  Re-
formed,  doctrine  against  the  constant  attacks  of  Romanists  and  Lutherans."1 

Schaff  informs  us  that  the  work  was  printed  shortly  afterwards  in  English, 
namely  at  Cambridge  in  1586,  at  London  in  1643,  and  with  an  altered  title 
again  at  London  in  1842. His  bibliography  adds  to  these  an  older  French  and  a 
more  recent  German  translation.2 

Starting from  the available indications concerning the nature of the  "Harmo-
nia", its historical  context,  and  the  composer's  intention,  I soon  discovered  that 
most  major  church  histories  and histories  of  doctrine  did not mention  this work 
at all; yet  it has not  been  completely  forgotten  and  on  occasion  some  aspects of 
it  have  been  the  object  of  special  notice. 

This is true  first with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the  "Harmonia".  Besides  Schaff, 
all  the  major  collections  of  reformed  confessions  have  given  short  descriptions 
of  the  "Harmonia":  Augusti,  Niemeyer,  E. F. Karl  Müller  and  Cochrane.3  The 
most  recent was  Otto  Weber  who, in  his  "Vorerwägungen  zu  einer  neuen  Aus(cid:173)
gabe  reformierter  Bekenntnisschriften"  which  are  still  good  today,  sees  in  it  "a 
kind  of  reply  to  the  'Book  of  Concord'",  though  it  remained  like  the  "Syn-
tagma"  of  1595/16124  a  purely  private  enterprise  in  that  it  did  not  "gain  the 
support  of  either  the  Churches  or the  political  authorities".5  This  fact,  as Weber 
rightly  observed,  is the  product  of  the  nature  of  the  reformed  Churches:  "there 
is  no such  thing  as  a reformed  corpus  doctrinae".6 

1  Philipp Schaff, The Creeds of Christendom with a History and Critical Notes, 3 vols, 

6* Edition, New York and  London  1933,1, p. 354; III, p. 195f  (Facsimile  of the title 
page and first  page of the  Preface). Hereafter  cited as Schaff. 

2  The French  national  Synod of Vitre  1583 dealt with a French  edition. See "Tous les 
Synodes  nationaux  des  Eglises  reformees  de  France", Jean  Aymon (Ed.),  La  Haye 
1710, vol. 1,131,167.  The German translation was published  by August Ebrard,  Bar(cid:173)
men  1887, under the title of "Salnar's  Harmonia confessionum  fidei". 

3  Jo. Christ. Guil. Augusti, Corpus librorum  Symbolicorum. Elberfeldi  1827, p.606-610. 
H. A. Niemeyer,  Collectio  confessionum  in  ecclesiis  reformatis  publicatorum,  Lipsiae 
1840,  (Praefatio)  p.V-VIII.  E. F. Karl  Müller, Die  Bekenntnisschriften  der  refor(cid:173)
mierten Kirche. In authentischen Texten mit geschichtlicher Einleitung und Register, 
Leipzig  1903, (Einleitung) p.XIII. Hereafter  cited  as Müller. Arthur C. Cochrane,  Re(cid:173)
formed  Confessions  of the  16th Century, Philadelphia  1966, p. 12 f. passim.  Hereafter 
cited  as  Cochrane.  The  Bibliographia  Irenica,  by  Axel  Hilmar  Swinne,  Hildesheim 
1977, knows the "Harmonia" (Nr. 755) and the English version of  1842 (Nr. 744) but 
does not name Salvard. 

4  Corpvs  et  syntagma  Confessionvm  fidei.  See  title  page  and  first  page  in  Schaff VA, 

193 f. 

5  Otto Weher, Vorerwägungen  zu  einer  neuen  Ausgabe  reformierter  Bekenntnisschrif(cid:173)
ten; in: Hören und Handeln, Festschrift  für Ernst Wolf zum 60. Geburtstag, herausge(cid:173)
geben von Helmut Gollwitzer und  Hellmut Traub, München  1962, p. 388-398, espe-
cially p. 389f. Hereafter  cited  as Weber. 

6  Weber, p. 390. 

282 

Secondly,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the  historical  context  of  the  "Harmo-
nia".  It  belongs  to  the  latter  part  of  the  so-called  Second  Reformation;  this 
means  specifically  that  it was  the  product  of  the  endeavours, also  supported  by 
England, to unify  all the  Protestants against  Rome, which were made  during  the 
middle  of  the  1570s. They  were  involved  with  the  controversy  over  the  Lord's 
Supper,  the  formation  of  the  "Book  of  Concorde",  the  change  of  authority  and 
religious  allegiance  in  the  Palatinate, and  must  be  understood  against  the  back-
ground  of  the  political and  confessional  troubles  in  France  and the  Netherlands. 
As  Heppe,  Gillet,  von  Bezold  and  Cuno7  indicated  a  100  years  ago,  and J. N. 
Bakhuizen  van den  Brink  has done  with  even greater  thoroughness  in  an  essay8 
published  in  1941  which  unfortunately  is  hardly  known,  these  endeavours 
reached  their  culmination,  in  the  politico-ecclesiastical  realm  as  well  as  in  the 
spiritual-intellectual  one, at the  so-called  Frankfurt  Convent  of  the  27th and  28th 
September  1577.  Its  lasting  result  was: the  "Harmonia  confessionum  fidei". 

And  thus, thirdly, the  real  Intention  of the  "Harmonia" is revealed: it  belongs 
to  the  history  of  ecumenism;  it  is  -  as  I  shall  demonstrate  -  a  first  significant 
Statement of  that "reformed  catholicism", which  originated  during  the  16th Cen(cid:173)
tury  primarily  in  Zürich  and  Geneva  and  could  give  most  valuable  impulses  to 
today's  ecumenical  movement. John  T. McNeill  has written  in  1930  in  his  fasci-
nating  book,  "Unitive  Protestantism":  "The  emergence  of  Protestant  unionism 
constitutes  a  challenge  to  the  Student  of  Reformation  history  ...  The  motives, 
ideals,  and  objectives  which  give  real  character  to  a  movement  are  in  this  case 
often  obscured.  Because  schism  and  disruption  followed  in  the  wake  of  the  Re(cid:173)
formation,  it is often  assumed  that  they were  its  conscious  objectives.  It  is  high 
time  that investigators  devoted  some  attention  to the  problem  of ascertaining  in 
what  degree  the  Reformation  cherished  the  principle  of  unity  and  sought  its 
realization".9 

7  J.F.A.  Gillet, Crato von Crafftheim  und seine Freunde, 2 Theile, Frankfurt  a. M. 1860, 

2.Theil, Vier und  zwanzigstes  Kapitel, p. 168-205, especially p. 186f.  Hereafter  cited 
as Gillet. H(einrkh) Heppe, Geschichte  des deutschen  Protestantismus  in den Jahren 
1555-1581, 4.Bd.: 1577-83, Frankfurt  a.M.  1865, § 1 Die Werbung der Königin Eli(cid:173)
sabeth von England bei den deutschen  Fürsten, p. lf.,  especially p.6f.  and notes 1  and 
2;  § 2  Pfalzgraf  Johann  Casimir  und  der  reformierte  Convent  zu  Frankfurt  a.M., 
p. 16-29. 
Briefe des Pfalzgrafen Johann Casimir mit verwandten Schriftstücken  gesammelt und 
bearbeitet  von  Friedrich  von Bezold,  l.Bd.:  1576-1582,  München  1882. F. W. Cuno, 
Daniel Tossanus der Ältere, Professor  der Theologie und  Pastor (1541-1602),  l.Teil, 
Amsterdam  1898, p. 109f. 

8  J.N.  Bakhuizen van den Brink, Het Convent te Frankfort  27-28  September  1577 en 
de Harmonia Confessionum, in: Nederl. archief voor kerkgesch., 32,1941, p. 235-280. 
Hereafter  cited as Bakhuizen. 

9  John  T. McNeill,  Unitive  Protestantism.  A  study  in  our  Religious  Resources,  New 

York-Cincinnati-Chicago  1930, p. 15f. The same author deals with the "Unitive Pro-
testantisme" as well in the following works: 

283 

Finally,  valuable  indications  about  the  pursuit  of  unity  which  the  " H a r m o-
nia"  represented  can  be  obtained  from  the  biographies  of  the  authors  of  the 
"Harmonia"  which  have  been  already  mentioned  by  Schaff  and  others.  I  refer 
here  only  to  the  two  most  important  ones.  Geisendorf  has  observed  in  his  bio-
graphy  of  Theodore  Beza,  that  the  study  of  the  correspondence  of  Calvin's  suc-
cessor  "permet  d'affirmer  ici  que  sa  coUaboration  ä  T H a r m o n i e'  fut  tres  active 
et  probablement  preponderante".10  Olivier  Labarthe  has  referred  to  the  "Har(cid:173)
monia"  and  its  proper  editor  in  volume  IV  of  the  "Registres  de  la  Compagnie 
des  Pasteurs  de  Geneve",11  and  finally  in  1979  in  an  essay  entitled  "Jean-Fran-
cois  Salvard.  Ministre  de  l'Evangile  (1530-1585)",  in  which  he  published  36  let(cid:173)
ters  written  by  Salvard,  and  among  them  is  also  a  copy  of  the  dedicatory  preface 
to  the  "Harmonia".12 

-  The  History  and  Charakter  of  Calvinism,  New  York  1954. 
-  The  Reformed  Churches  and  the  Ecumenical  Movement,  in:  The  Presbyterian 

World,  vol.XXII,  Nrs.  7-8,1954,  p.327-333. 

-  The  Ecumenical  Idea  and  Efforts  to  Realize  it,  1517-1618.  In:  A  History  of  the 
Ecumenical  Movement  1517-1948.  Ed. by  Ruth  Rouse  and  Stephen  Charles  Neill, 
Philadelphia  1954, p. 27-67,  especially  p.53. 

10  Paul  F. Geisendorf,  Theodore  de  Beze,  Geneve,  1949,  p. 337-339.  Hereafter  cited  as 

Geisendorf. 

11  Registres  de  la  Compagnie  des  Pasteurs  de  Geneve,  Tome  IV,  1575-1582,  publies 
sous  la  direction  des  Archives  d'Etat  de  Geneve  par  Olivier Labarthe  et  Bernard  Les-
caze, Geneve  1974, p.XIIf.: "Parmi  les  lettres  rejues  ou  echangees  par  la  Compagnie, 
certaines  forment  de  veritables  dossiers  permettant  de  suivre  une  affaire  durant  plu-
sieurs mois, ce qui  accroit  encore  leur interet.  Les difficultes  rencontrees  par les Calvi-
nistes  en  Allemagne,  notamment  apres  le  deces  de  l'Electeur  palatin  Frederic III, les 
tentatives  faites  par  son  fils  pour  rassembler  les  calvinistes  allemands  et  les  multiples 
tractations  qui  aboutirent  ä  la  publication  de  l'Harmonia  Confessionum  fidei  consti-
tuent  l'une  des  parties  essentielles  de  cette  correspondance."  See  as well  p. 362-365, 
letter  of  Salvard  to  Gwalther  -  23. 3. 1581, p. 366-371,  Beze,  on  behalf  of  the  Com(cid:173)
pagnie, writes  to  pastors  of  Zürich  -  24. 3. 1581, p. 380-385, Beze  and  Rotan,  on  be(cid:173)
half  of  the  Compagnie,  write  to  the  Calvinist  refugees  of  Nüremberg  -  (28. 3. 1581), 
p. 386-389,  Gwalther,  on  behalf  of  the  pastors  of  Zürich,  writes  to  the  Compagnie  -
4.4.1581,  p. 390-392, Amport,  on  behalf  of  the  pastors  of  Berne, writes  to  the  Com(cid:173)
pagnie-  19.5.1581, p. 395-400, the pastors  of  Neustadt write to the  Compagnie-  27. 
6.1581. 

12  Olivier  Labarthe,  Jean  Francois  Salvard,  Ministre  de  l'Evangile  (1530-1585).  Vie, 
ceuvre  et  correspondance;  in:  Polemiques  religieuses.  Etudes  et Textes, Societe  d'his-
toire  et  d'archeologie  de  Geneve,  (Memoires  et  documents  t.XLVIII)  Geneve-Paris 
1979,  p.345f.  Hereafter  cited  as  Labarthe.  Among  the  36  documents  -  and  those 
pointed  to  in  note  1 1 -, more  letters  connected  with  the  edition  of  the  "Harmonia", 
besides  the  above  mentioned  prologue,  are  to  be  found.  Their  publication  is  import(cid:173)
ant,  but  it  is  as  necessary  to  underline  that  the  edited  letters  represent  only  a  little 
fraction  of  all  correspondence  dealing  with  the  "Harmonia".  The  most  relevant  are 
those  of  Beza, Gwalther, Johann  Casimir,  Zanchi, Tossanus. A  provisional  sighting of 
the  correspondence  between  Beza  and  Gwalther,  respectively  between  the  Churches 
of  Geneva  and  Zürich,  produces  thirty  letters  for  the  period  1577-1581. 

284 

II. 

In  order  to  save  time,  I shall  reduce  my  remarks  with  regard  to  the  author  and 
the  historical  context  of  the  "Harmonia"  to  a minimum;  further  details  may  be 
taken  from  the  contributions  already  mentioned  by  Labarthe13  and  Bakhuizen 
van  den  Brink14  who  refer  to  the  earlier  sources  and  literature  on  the  subject. 
Jean-Francois  Salvard  came  from  the  Aosta Valley and  studied  theology  and 
law  in  Geneva  (eventually  also  in  Zürich),  later  on  he  was, with  interruptions, 
the  minister  of  various  Churches  in  France  and  the  Western  part  of  Switzer-
land.  He  also  served  as  minister  of  the  renowned  congregation  of  French  re-
fugees  in  Frankfurt,  between  1571 and  1576. Because  of  his connections, know-
ledge  and  experience  with  "toute  l'Europe",  he  was  a  committed  advocate  not 
only  of  the  Reformed  Churches,  but  of  the  concerns  of  Protestantism  on  the 
whole. In  this commitment  lies the  real importance, according  to  Labarthe; and 
the  visible  expression  of  this  commitment  is  the  "Harmonia". 

With  regard  to  the  historical  context  of  the  "Harmonia",  i.e.  the  desire  to 
achieve the  union  of all the  Protestants  against  Rome, I have already  mentioned 
the  Frankfurt  Convent  of  1577,  where  representatives  of  nearly  all  the  Euro(cid:173)
pean  Reformed  Churches  assembled:  theologians  and  councillors  from  the  Pa-
latinate,  theologians  and  lay  advisers  from  the  French,  Hungarian,  Polish  and 
Dutch  Churches,  as  well  as  from  England  and  Navarra.  The  Swiss  Churches 
were  not  represented, but  they  supported  the  whole  enterprise  from  afar.  It was 
a kind  of  European  General  Synod;  the  Convent  decided  to  coordinate  various 
plans of action: on  the  one hand, to take up  contacts with  the  Lutheran  authori-
ties  (in  order  to  prevent,  if  possible,  the  publication  of  the  "Book  of  Concord" 
with  its condemnations  of  the  Reformed  Churches), on  the  other  hand, to  com-
pose  a new  confession  which  would  be  binding  for  all  the  Reformed  Churches. 
Both  projects  served the  same purpose, but they did not work  out. A  deputation 
consisting  of  the  English  ambassador,  Robert  Beale, and  the  Dutch  lawyer  Pau(cid:173)
lus Knibbius  to the  Lutheran  princes  was doomed  from  the  Start, and  Beale was 
led  on  his  return  to  make  the  following,  scarcely  flattering  report: 

"...  how  little  the  Germans  understand  how  to  take  advantage  of  the  right 
moment  and  how  incapable  they  are  of  looking  beyond  the  narrow  stand-
point  of  their  lower  middle  class  existence  and  the  interests  of  their  small 
territorial  states  in  order  to  act for  the  benefit  of  a general  and  greater  cause; 
that  there  is such  a dogmatism  in  this  country  that  it  makes  men  willing, in 
order  to  save  just  one  comma  of  Luther's  teaching,  to  sit  by  and  watch  the 

13  Labarthe, p.352f. (Vie et oeuvre). See as well some notes on Salvard in "Bulletin de la 

Societe d'Histoire  du  Protestantisme  Francais" 36, 1887, p.387-389, 498-503, 623f. 
14  Bakhuizen,  p.257f.  (III.  Het  Convent);  p.271f.  (IV.  De  Harmonia  Confessionum 

[1581] en het Corpus et Syntagma [1612]). 

285 

Church  collapse  in  ruins  without  doing  anything  about  it;  a  dogmatism 
which  does  not  respect  that  tolerance  possessed  by  the  true  Church  of  the 
Reformation  which  believes  that  the  congregation  of  Christ  on  earth  is 
founded  upon  faith  and  love and  does not  consider  Dogmatics  as the  rock of 
its  foundation."15 

Because of ideas, which were first  developed  by Salvard and  the  Landgrave of 
Hesse  and  then  strongly  supported  by the  Churches  of  Zürich  and  Geneva,  the 
plans  for  a new  and  unified  reformed  confession  were  subsequently  dropped  in 
favour  of the "Harmonia". Zanchi  published  in  1585 another  "Confessio"  which 
was  to  serve  as  the  basis  for  a  common  confession  in  accordance  with  the  first 
wishes, but  he  did  so  privately16.  However,  the  "Harmonia"  had  the  Support of 
the  international  Reformed  Churches.  It  had  been  printed  in  1581. The  title-
page  reads  as  follows: 

"Harmonia  confessionvm  fidei  orthodoxarum  et  reformatorum  ecclesiarum, 
quae  in  praecipuis  quibusque  Europae  regnis,  nationibus  et  prouinciis  sac-
ram  euangelii  doctrinam  pure  profitentur:  quarum  catalogum  et ordinem  se-
quentes  paginae  indicabunt.  Additae  sunt  ad  calcem  breuissimae  obserua-
tiones: quibus  tum  illustrantur  obscura,  tum,  quae  in  speciem  pugnare  inter 
se videri  possunt,  perspicue  atque  modestissime  conciliantur:  et,  si quae  ad-
huc  controuersa  manent,  syncere  indicantur.  Quae  omnia  ecclesiarum  Galli-
carum  et  Belgicarum  nomine  subiiciuntur  libero  et  prudenti  reliquarum  om-
nium  iudicio.  Genevae,  apud  Petrum  Santandreanum  1581." 

We  finally  reach  our  subject-matter.  The  first  question  with  which  we  must 
deal is the  fact  that  the  official  editors, the  French  and  Dutch  Churches, left  the 
"Harmonia"  to  the  free  judgement  of  the  Reformed  Churches.  It was not  to  be 
a binding  confession  for  the  faithful.  As you  may draw from  the "Apodixis  capi-
tum",17  the  "Harmonia"  takes  into  account  11  confessions  and  deals  with  19 
Loci. A  small  "Catalogus  confessionum"  introduces  these  in  the  Order  of  their 
formation,  giving  some  indication  about  their  most  important  circumstances: 
Confessio  Augustana,  Suevica  (Tetrapolitana),  Basiliensis,  Helvetica  I,  Saxonica, 
Wirtembergensis,  Gallica, Anglica,  Helvetica  II, Belgica, Bohemica.18  The  syste-

15  Bakhuizen, <p.251 referring to Gillet. Equally pointed formulated  Languet his opinion 
to the ambassador  Philip  Sydney: "Germania pacata esset, nisi eam sua ambitione et 
arrogantia turbarent  theologi" (quoted  following  Bakhuizen, p. 269, with note 2). 

16  De religione christiana fides, Neustadt  1585. 
17  Apodixis capitum, seu articulorum  singularum  Confessionum  Harmoniae, uti illa in(cid:173)

ter se sibi respondent.  See Facsimile. 

18  This "Catalogus  confessionum"  (p. 17-20)  offers  some information  about  the  origins 
and importance  of  the confessions.  Here  some examples: p. 17,1. "Augustana, Anno 
1530  Carola  V.  imperatori  ab  illustrissimis  aliquot  Germaniae  principibus  aliisque 

286 

matic  arrangement  of  the  "Harmonia"  follows  the  "Confessio  Helvetica  Poste(cid:173)
rior",  as  this  confession  had  been  already  accepted  by  the  majority  of  the  Re-
formed  Churches.  Its  19  sections  deal  with  the  Holy  Scriptures,  God,  eternal 
providence  and  creation,  fall  and  sin, predestination, Jesus-Christ,  law  and  gos-
pel,  repentance  and  conversion,  justification  by  faith,  the  Church  catholic  and 
its servants, true  and  false  sacraments (baptism  and  the  Lord's supper  in  particu-
lar), public worship  and  liturgical  practices, marriage  and  celibacy, the  temporal 
power.19 

The  general  survey  and  the  "breussimae  obseruationes"  on  the  title-page, as 
well  as  the  very  impressive  preface,  discuss  the  function  and  meaning  of  the 
"Harmonia".  The  preface  begins  with  the  request  that,  as a matter  of  principle, 
differences  of opinions between  churches  should  be settled  by peaceful  means: 

"Magnificently  says  Ambrosius  somewhere:  'There  shall  not  be  discord  but 
concord  among  the  servants of Christ.'  Since such  an indolence, especially  in 
godly  matters, reigns  in  the  human  heart,  that  we  do  not  understand  things, 
which  are  by  the  way  completely  clear,  it  is  not  possible  to  deny,  that  we 
may  gain  a great  deal  of  light  on  the  basis  of  Joint  inquiry  and  of  amicable 
and  brotherly  deliberation.  And  above  all,  that  seems  useful  and  necessary, 
that  the  sense  of  each  other  may  be  sharpened,  in  Order that  (the gifts)  given 
by the  Lord to particular members  of  the  Church, shall be communicated  for 
the  best  of  the  whole  body, and  that  all bad  passion  shall  be  put  aside  in Or(cid:173)
der  to  listen  to  Christ, who  is the  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  as  the  only  master 
and  doctor  of  the  Church,  in  order  that  he, being  the  prince  of  peace,  shall 
unite  our  hearts  through  his  spirit,  so  as  to,  if  possible,  we  all  share  in  the 
Lord  one  and  the  same  mind."20 

sacri  Imperii  ordinibus (quos  Protestantes  vocant) Germanice  primum  Agustae Vin-
delicorum  exhibita, deinde eo ipso anno  cum  praefatione  et subscriptione  auctorum 
Latine emendatior in quibusdam articulis Wittembergae  edita et publicata". p. 19, IX. 
"Heluetica posterior, a Tigurinis pastoribus anno 1566 conscripta et non modo a Tigu-
rinis ipsis confoederatisque  Bernensibus, Scaphusianis, Sangallensibus, Rheticis, Myl-
husianis  et  Biennensibus  sed  et  a  Geneuensibus,  ac  Sabaudicis  omnibus,  Polonicis 
item et Hungaricis ac Scoticis Ecclesiis approbata et subscripta." It is interesting that 
the Confessions  appear in an other order on the "Apodixis". First the Confessio  He(cid:173)
luetica Posterior, because it had been accepted by nearly all reformed  churches, soon 
after its publication in  1566. See Joachim Staedtke (Ed.), Glauben und Bekennen. Vier(cid:173)
hundert Jahre Confessio  Helvetica  Posterior. Beiträge zu ihrer Geschichte und Theo(cid:173)
logie, Zürich  1966, p. 54-204. 

19  For details see Apodixis. 
20  Quoted  following  Labarthe,  p.440. -  The  first  sentence  has  to  be  read  as  follows: 

"Praeclare  quodam  loco  dicit  Ambrosius: 'Inter  seruos  Christi  contentio  non  debet 
esse, sed collatio'." (See Ambrosiaster in: 2Tim. 2,15, ed H.I. Vogels, Corp.Script.eccl. 
Lat. LXXXI/3, Vienna  1969, p.306, 9f.:  Conlatio ergo inter dei seruos esse debet, non 
altercatio). 

287 

If we  keep  in  mind  the  position  of  the  Ancient  Church,  and  remember  also 

that  the  true  Church  is invisible, we  have  to  admit  that  the  plurality  of  confes(cid:173)
sions  is natural. The  "plurality"  is explained  by  the  fact,  that  the  Christian  faith 
cannot  be  summarized  once  and  for  all, but  it  must  be  done  each  time  anew, 
out  of  a  different  practical  Situation. 

The  preface  continues: 

"If  everybody  is told  to  confess  his  faith  as  often  as  it  is  necessary  to  glorify 
God  and  to  edify  the  Church,  how  can  it  be  surprising  that  cities,  provinces 
and  even  kingdoms  published  their  own  confession  of  faith?"21 

The  "Harmonia's" preface  goes  on  to explain  that: In  order  to  refute  the  Ro(cid:173)

man  Catholic  accusation  of  heresy,  such  a  confession,  a  rendering  of  account, 
could  not  be  done  in  any  other  way  by  the  European  Reformed  Churches. 

"If  therefore  kingdoms,  cities  and  even  provinces  have  confessed  their  faith 
separately,  that  happened,  because  so  far  the  circumstances  of  the  time  did 
not  permit  them  to  hold  a  general  synod  of  all  those  who  confess  the  re(cid:173)
formed  faith".22 

It  is true, the  preface  states, one  uniform  confession  would  be  desirable. Yet 
the  multiplicity  of  confessions  is  not  caused  by  disagreement,  but  rather  wit-
nesses  in  its  own  way  to  the  unity  of  the  truth.  The  various  confessions  State 
clearly  their  differences  from  Rome,  and  their  reservations  about  the  fictitious 
"Book  of  Concord"  of  the  Lutherans. An  impressive  number  of  active  advocates 
of  the  reformed  matter  can  prove  that  they 

"do  not  debate  in  the  twilight  and  waste  their  time  with  futile  things,  but 
have suffered  for many years for  the  sake  of  the truth  of  God  a great  many of 
trouble  which  have  also  included  the  shedding  of  blood.  But  we  do  know 
that  this truth  does not  come  from  men, nor  has won  its strength  from  men. 
It  is  simple  and  it wants  to  be  presented  and  taught  in  simplicity."23 

Undoubtedly,  the  "Harmonia"  intends  to  refute  defamation.  Yet  its  declared 
main  objective  is and  remains to end all divisions. For the  sake of this goal, even 
confessions  which were not  reformed  were included  on  purpose  in the  "Harmo(cid:173)
nia" : the  sound  of  all  Protestant  voices  should  be  heard.  In  particular,  the  pre(cid:173)
face  makes  clear, "illa de  Coena  Domini  controuersia"  is not  a sufficient  reason 
for  division  among  Christians. 

"Concerning  the  divergence  of  opinion  on  the  Lord's  Supper,  there  is in  it-

21  Labarthe, p.441. 
22  Labarthe, p.441f. 
23  Labarthe, p.444. 

288 

seif, in this  matter as such, no controversy;  concerning  some  accessory  ques-
tions  and circumstances we do think  differently  upon.  On  the essential  mat(cid:173)
ter  itself,  I say, unity  prevails; nevertheless,  since  the gifts  of  God are of  dif-
ferent  kind,  some  formulate  with  more  clarity,  others  with  less  clarity  and, 
perhaps,  less  skill, what  their  opinion  is." 
And:  "Divergences  of  opinions  (only)  exist  on  how  we  participate  (in  the 
true  Body  and  Blood  of Jesus-Christ)."24 

Making  these  assumptions, the "Harmonia"  is able  to present  itself  as the li-
terary anticipation  of a General  European  Synod  of Protestants  -  as a true  "har(cid:173)
monia" -,  because  it reproduces  briefly  and  clearly the most  important  original 
texts, and deliberately  does  not obscure  for apologetical  reasons  the  differences, 
which  remain,  but rather  clarifies  them. 

The  preface  goes  on  to  make  the "Harmonia's"  aim  clear: 

"There  is no  reason  forcing  anyone  to  believe  that  I wanted  to  blend  these 
many  opinions  to make, so to speak, a mixture  of diverging  qualities,  follow-
ing  the example  of some  mediators, of which  a great  number  existed  not so 
long  ago.  I  have  left  all  unchanged,  so  that  everybody  may  recognize  his 
words  and  compare  them  with  the  words  of  others.  Thus  he  will  see  that 
nothing  has been  added,  or subtracted,  or appended,  or distorted.  Finally, if 
anyone  observes  the form  and  object  of  this  work  more  thoroughly,  he will, 
not  without  reason,  judge  it  a  reliable  summary  of  the  Christian  teaching, 
consisting  of the writings  of the pious  churches  of almost all Europe, and so 
to  speak  compiled  and  accepted  by a common  Synod."25 

Salvard links a warm appeal for Christian  humility  and charity to these words: 

"If  they  practise  the  T  belong  to  Paul',  'I  belong  to  Kephas',  the  words 
should  also  be  heard:  'I  belong  to  Christ,  I belong  to  the  Church'.  If  some 
things  are  not  acceptable,  there  is  an  overwhelming  number  of  things  to 
which  one  can  easily  agree. The  basis  of  the  faith  remains  the  same,  there-
fore,  also  the love  shall  remain  the same, and no  one should  be  discouraged 
to recognize  those as brethren, whom  God does  not refuse  as his sons; as for 
us, we will not hold  of little  account  those  for the sake  of whom  Christ  held 
himself  of  little  value."26 

After  that,  the  preface  concludes  with  exhortations  to  forgivingness,  and 
pointing  to the ineffectiveness  of  narrow-minded  quarrelling  and the variety of 
opinions  already  expressed  in  the  New  Testament. 

24  Labarthe, p.445. 
25  Labarthe, p.446. 
26  Labarthe, p.446, see also p.448. 

289 

III. 

We  now  arrive  at  the  main  issue: What  does  freedom  mean  in  the  Reformed 
Confessions  of the  16Ih Century? The  "Harmonia"  itself  gives one answer  which 
at  first  glance  may  seem  superficial.  It  refers  to  the  freedom  which  Reformed 
Christians  had,  on  the  one  hand,  to  free  themselves  from  "the  Babylonian  cap-
tivity  of  the  Church"  of  Rome,  and  on  the  other  hand,  to  understand  them(cid:173)
selves as linked  together  in  a new, pluralist  Community  of  churches.  It is neces-
sary  to  pay  attention  to  both  aspects  of  this  first  concept  of  freedom. 

With  regard  to  the  Separation  from  Rome,  it  was  clear  and  comprehensive, 
yet  not  final  in  principle.  It  comprehended  all  aspects  of  church  life,  law  and 
power,  doctrine  and  piety,  and  their  impact  upon  the  political,  economic  and 
social  problems  of  everyday  life.  In  nearly  all of  the  19 sections  of  the  "Harmo(cid:173)
nia", we  find  damnations  of  the  false  doctrines  of  the  Roman  Catholic. 

But  the  second  aspect  is more  important  for  us. We  have  already  heard  that 
the  "Harmonia"  understood  itself  to  represent,  so  to  speak, a General  Synod: a 
Synod  based  on  freedom,  not  in  the  sense  of  delimiting, but  on  the  contrary, in 
the  sense  of  a joining  together,  of  a readiness  to  relativize  one's  own  Statement 
of  faith,  to  listen  to  other  churches  and  confessions,  to  talk  together  and  to 
make  comparisons.  The  "Harmonia"  anticipates  with  this,  in  my  opinion,  the 
basic  thrust  of  the  ecumenical  movement  in  the  20th  Century.  Cochrane  re-
marked,  not  without  reason: 

"The  specific  local  or  national  church  makes  its  confession  of  faith:  the 
church  of  Berne, of  Basel, of  Bremen,  or  Bentheim,  of  France  or of  Scotland. 
Each  looks for  his direction  first  in  direct appeal  to the  Bible. They greet  one 
another,  back  and  forth,  as from  one  island  to  another,  from  Basel  to  Strass-
burg,  from  Geneva  to  Zürich,  rejoicing  over  every  possibility  of  mutual  un-
derstanding."27 

With  this  profession  of  pluralism,  the  "Harmonia"  pleads  not  only  for  a 
modern,  but  also  for  a genuinely  reformed  concern.  Historically  speaking:  the 
very  contribution  of  the  reformed  churches  to  the  ecumenical  movement28  has 
come  from  their  commitment  to  the  free  hearing  of  the Word  of  God  and  their 
pursuit  of  a  continuous  reformation  of  the  church  on  the  basis  of  the  Gospel. 

27  Arthur  C Cochrane  (Ed.).  Reformed  Confessions  of  the  16th  Century,  Philadelphia 

28 

1952,  p. 17,  n. 12.  Hereafter  cited as Cochrane. 
f.  F.  Torrance,  O ur witness  through  Doctrine.  In: T he Presbyterian  World,  Vol.XXII, 
Geneva  1954,  p.318; " We in  this  Alliance  must  therefore  engage  in the World  Coun(cid:173)
cil  of  Churches  as the  Ecclesia  semper  reformanda,  in  order  to  let the W o rd  of G od 
speak  to us in  the context  of the Joint  study  of the  Holy  Scriptures,  in  order  that  we 
may  be  more  and more  reformed  by it  and in  this  continuous  reforming  be  shaped 
and  armed  for the great  mission  of  Christ,  the mission  of  reconciliation,  in which  we 
are  engaged  as  servants." 

290 

Salvard shared  this concern  and  demonstrated  it by his sharp rebuttal  of  Rome's 
reproaches: 

"They  say  that  we  abandoned  the  Catholic  Church,  in  order  to  follow  all 
kinds  of  human  fantasies,  they  call  us  heretics,  schismatics  and  sectarians, 
and, mockingly,  call us  again  and  again  confessionalists  and  accuse  us  of  not 
agreeing with  each  other,  either  among  ourselves, or with  others  who  refuse 
the  authority  of  the  Roman  pope, and  of  having as many  religions  as  confes-
sions  of  faith."29 

According  to  Salvard,  the  truth  is  exactly  on  the  reverse, because,  as  Hilary 

had  long  ago  remarked: 

'"In  many  ways, ...  the  truth  was  acquired  from  the  advice  and  opinions  of 
the  bishops,  and  proper  understanding  is  expounded  through  the  recorded 
confessions  of  faith.'  And  somewhat  later:  'You  should  not  be  astonished, 
dear  brethren,  that  the  faith  has  been  explained  so  often:  this  is  a  need 
brought  about  by  the  madness  of  the  heretics.'"30 

And  later,  Salvard  says: 

"They  should  now  stop  mocking  us  as  confessionalists,  except  if  they  wish 
that  we  should  say, that  it  is far  better  to  be  named  after  one's  confession  of 
faith,  than  after  the  negation  of  the  truth.  For,  as  from  one  single  source 
many  brooks  can  flow, so several  confessions  of  faith  may  flow  from  the  one 
truth  of  the  faith."31 

I  said  that  Salvard  pleads  with  his  profession  of  allegiance  to  pluralism  a 
genuine  reformed  cause. In  fact,  the  "Harmonia"  is a testimony  of  the  unity of 
the  church,  professed  by  all  the  reformed  fathers:  above  all, Zwingli,  Bullinger 
and  Calvin  and  their  successors  Beza  and  Gwalther.  Without  giving  too  many 
details, let me  remind  you  first  of all of  Calvin, respectively  of  the  extraordinari-
ly careful  and  valuable  contributions  by  Otto  Weber32  and  Willem  Nijenhuis33 
29  Harmonia Confessionum,  Praefatio: Labarthe p. 440t. 
30  Harmonia  Confessionum,  Praefatio:  Labarthe p.441 (see Hilary of Poitiers,  Liber de 

synodis seu de fide Orientalium  27, 62f.,  Patr.Lat.X, col.522: Multifarie  ... episcopo-
rum  consiliis  atque  sententiis  quaesita  ueritas  est, et  intelligentiae  ratio  exposita est 
per singulas scriptae fidei professiones  ... -  Nihil autem mirum uideri nobis debet, fra-
tres  charissimi,  quod  tarn  frequenter  exponi  fides  coeptae  sunt:  necessitatem  hanc 
furor  haereticus imponit). 

31  Harmonia Confessionum,  Praefatio: Labarthe p.442. 
32  Otto Weber,  Die  Einheit  der  Kirche  bei  Calvin.  In: Calvin-Studien  1959, ed. Jürgen 

Moltmann, Neukirchen/Moers  1960, p. 130f. 

33  Willem Nijenhuis, Calvinus oecumenicus. Calvijn  en de eenheid der kerk in het licht 
van zijn  briefwisseling  (with a summary), 's-Gravenhage  1959, and: Die Aufgabe  der 
reformierten  Kirche  in  der  ökumenischen  Bewegung.  In: Calvin-Studien  1959. Ed. 
Jürgen  Moltmann, 1960, p.62-83. Both contributions offer  a wide ränge of bibliogra-
phy. 

291 

to  the  theme  "Calvinus  oecumenicus",  which  were  printed  on  the  occasion  of 
the  Calvin  anniversary  in  1959  and  really  opened  the  way for  Rome's  discovery 
of Calvin.34  Emphasizing  the "reformed  catholicity" of Calvinism,  Nijenhuis  de-
scribes  exactly what  Calvin  as a reformer  of  the  church  had  been  searching  for 
his life  long. This is expressed  in  the  titles  of  Book  IV of  "The  Institutes" in  the 
following  way: "De  externis  mediis  uel  adminiculis,  quibus  Deus  in  Christi  so-
cietatem  nos  inuitat  et  in  ea  retinet"  and  "De  uera  ecclesia,  cum  qua  nobis  co-
lenda  est  unitas,  quia  piorum  omnium  mater  est".  Finally,  Calvin's  desire  for 
continuity  and  comprehensiveness  is  manifested  in  the  following  remarkable 
passage: 

"As  for  us, we  certainly  do  not  contest  that  the  Church  of  God  has  always 
been  in  the  world.  For  we  hear,  what  God  promises  about  the  everlasting 
seed  of  Christ.  In  the  same way as we  do  not  deny  that  there  was  a  continu-
ous  succession  of  the  church  since  the  beginning  of  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  until  our  times,  in  the  same  way  are  we  strongly  persuaded  that  it 
will  last  until  the  end  of  the  world."35 

Because  of  this  fundamental  approach,  Calvin  was  able  as early  as the  1540s 
to  agree  with  the  "Confessio  Augustana"  without  hesitation.  Yet  Bullinger, 
thanks  to his many experiences with  Luther and  the  Lutherans, was much  more 
reserved  in  this  respect.  "Confessio  Augustana  non  est  euangelium",  Bullinger 
wrote  on  the  16th May  1557 to Geneva.36  But this was not  an  absolute  rejection: 
as we  know  by Andre  Bouvier,  Bullinger  too was basically  "reformateur  et  con-
seiller cecumenique".37  In a letter  of the  15th December  1557, the  Zürich  minis-
ters  wrote  to  Beza: 

"And  we  do  not  reject  the  holy  unity  with  those  who  confess  the  same 
Christ  as we  do, be  they  Saxons  or  Swabians.  For  Christ  has  joined  us  all to-
gether  into  one  body  and  has  honoured  us  with  his  highly  holy  name,  not 
demanding  from  us  anything  more  urgently  but  mutual  love  and  holy  con-
cord. Yet we do not aim at just any kind  of concord, but a concord, well-con-
sidered,  moderate,  which  does  not  oppose  in  any  point  the  pure  truth  con-
fessed  until now, which  does not  throw darkness  nor doubt  on  the  clear  light 

34  See  Benno Gassmann,  Ecclesia reformata.  Die  Kirche  in  den  reformierten  Bekennt(cid:173)

nisschriften,  Freiburg-Basel-Wien  1968. 

33  Opera  Calvini  (hereafter  cited  as OC), vol. VII,  Brunsvigae  1868, column  610 (Vera 

christianae  pacificationis  et ecclesiae reformandae  ratio). 

36  OC, vol. XVI, Brunsvigae  1877, column 484. 
37  Andre Bouvier, Henri Bullinger, Reformateur et conseiller cecumenique. Zürich 1940. 
On  page  160 see facsimile  of  the  "Conciliatio  Calvinica" (French  translation  is pro-
vided). The background  of this document  has not yet been clarified.  See as well: 400 
Jahre  Zweites  Helvetisches  Bekenntnis.  Geschichte  und  ökumenische  Bedeutung, 
Zürich  1966. 

292 

and  the  intelligible  doctrine, a concord, which  ought  to be common  and  pre-
cious  to  all  pious  people  because  of  its  purity,  which  also  ought  to  be  firm 
and  lasting,  not  spreading  any  new  occasions  for  fresh  divergencies."38 

The  small difference  between  Calvin  and  Bullinger concerning pluralism  and 
unity  of  the  church,  especially  with  regard  to  the  "Confessio  Augustana",  is  in 
my  opinion  also  reflected  in  the  attitudes  of  Beza  and  Gwalther  towards  the 
"Harmonia".  Continuing  his  ecumenical  enterprises  of  1557  and  1558, and  his 
book  "De  pace  christianarum  ecclesiarum"  of  1566,  Beza  proudly  emphasized 
his  personal  commitment  and  his  Cooperation  in  the  framing  of  the  "Harmo(cid:173)
nia".39  On  the  other  hand,  after  his  first  reading  of  the  "Harmonia",  Gwalther 
immediately  remembered  the  past  difficulties  with  the  Lutherans.  In  the  name 
of  the  Zürich  ministers, he  requested  on  the  12th May  1581, that  the  preface  be 
amended  as  follows: 

"We  think  that  the  Contents  of  the  prologue  and  the  arrangement  of  the 
work  will  not  be  disadvantageous,  if  we,  in  the  beginning,  declare  that  our 
teachers  and  we ourselves  never  did  condemn  other  churches  recklessly,  but 
constantly  sought  peace  and  concord.  This  is clearly  supported  firstly  by  the 
history  of  the  Marburg  Colloquy  and  later  by  the  events  of  1536  and  subse-
quently.. ."40 
And:  "Therefore  we  planned  the  compilation  of  the  present  'Harmonia' 
through  which  all, educated  and  uneducated,  princes  as well  as  commoners, 
could  see as in  a mirror  or  on  a stage, how  cruel  and  flagrant  an  injustice  we 
suffer  from  our  opponents."41 

Concluding  my  remarks  on  the  genuineness  of  reformed  pluralism  and  its 
visible expression  in the "Harmonia", I wish to remind  you  of a short  Statement 
by  Ernst  Käsemann: 

38  Correspondance  de Theodore de Beze, recueillie par Hippolyte Aubert, publiee par F. 

Aubert,  H.Meylan et A. Dufour, tome II (1556-1558), Geneve  1962, p. 146. 

39  See  Geisendorf,  p.338f. As well  as: F.  Gardy  -  A. Dufour, Bibliographie  des oeuvres 

theologiques, litteraires, historiques et juridiques de Theodore de Beze, Geneve i960, 
(THR  41), Nr. 227, and  Tadataka Maruyama, The  Ecclesiology  of  Theodore  Beza. 
The  Reform  of the True Church, Geneve  1978, (THR 146), p.67f. and  134f. 

40  "Praefationis  argumentum  et ordinem hunc non incommodum  fore putamus, si prin-
cipio  protestemur  praeceptores  nostros  et  nos  ipsos  exteras  Ecclesias  nunquam  te-
mere  damnauisse, sed pacis atque concordiae  semper fuisse  Studiosos. Id quod  Mar-
purgensis Colloquii historia  primum, deinde quae anno  1536 et deinceps aliquandiu 
acta sunt, abunde testantur." Letter by Rudolf  Gwalther on behalf  of the Zürich Pas(cid:173)
tors, to Theodore  Beza, 12* May  1581. Gotha Ducal  Library A405, fol.  701. Quoted 
following  transcription  by  Labarthe, 

41  "Ideo  de  hac  Harmonia  concinnanda  nos  consilium  iniuisse, in  quo  ceu  in  speculo 
siue theatro publico omnes, tarn docti quam indocti, principes item uiri et plebei, ui-
dere possint quam atrox et notoria iniuria nobis fiat  ab aduersariis." Ibidem. 

293 

"The  variations  of  the  Kerygma  in  the  New  Testament  are  an  expression  of 
the  fact  that  already  in  Primitive  Christianity  there  was  a variety  of  different 
Confessions  which  existed  together.  They  also  succeeded  each  other,  fused 
with  each  other  and  limited  each  other."42 

Should  the  reformers  have  been  more  biblical  than  the  Bible? 

IV. 

What  about the  details of the  "Harmonia"? We  intend  to examine the  "freedom 
in faith", with  reference  to the  "locus classicus" of the reformed  theology, that is 
with  reference  to  ecclesiology.  In  order  to  give  you  an  idea  of  Salvard's  meth-
ods, I shall begin with  the  "analytica  distributio" of  section  10: "de sancta  eccle-
sia  catholica",  which  makes  a  distinction  between  "partes  uerae  doctrinae"  and 
"partes  contrariae  doctrinae".  False  doctrines  appear  -  in  the  following  order  -
with  the  Donatists,  Papists,  Anabaptists,  and  in  general  with  all  schismatics, 
hypocrites,  and  the  contumacious.  He  rejected  the  Papistes,  because  they 
attribute  to  the  church  a  double  head,  Christ  and  the  Pope,  false  marks,  and 
follow  the  doctrine  and  morals  of  the  Antichrist,  and  also because  they  confine 
the  church  to  distinguished  persons  and  places. 

On  the  other  hand, his  consideration  of  "Ecclesiae  christianae  ac uere  catho-
licae" deals with  no  less than  23 questions, among  others  with  the  definition  of 
the  church,  the  forms  of  the  church  ("ecclesia  militans, triumphans,  uisibilis  et 
inuisibilis"), with  the  unity,  head  and  foundation,  functions,  freedom,  Constitu(cid:173)
tion,  discipline  of  the  church,  with  its  members  and  the  presbyters. 

What  characterizes  this  catalogus  of  questions  on  the  whole, is confirmed,  if 
we  look  at  the  details.  Both  the  historical  framework  in  which  the  ecclesiology 
is  presented  and  the  way  in  which  the  doctrine  of  the  church  is  systematically 
integrated  into  the  different  Creeds, reveal an  astonishing  ecumenical  flexibility 
and  freedom.  Here,  I  am  forced  to  be  brief:  I  shall  consider  texts  drawn  only 
from  4 of  the  11 cited  confessions  in  the  "Harmonia",  from  the  "Confessio  Au(cid:173)
gustana",  "Gallica",  "Anglica"  and  "Helvetica  Posterior".  I  shall  make  a  brief 
comparison,  and  in  order  to  compare  them,  I  shall  make  some  remarks  only 
upon  the  nature,  the  unity  and  freedom  of  the  church. 

1. In  referring  to  the  nature  of  the  church,  these  four  confessions  link  ele-
ments  of  the  mediaeval  tradition  with  those  of  the  newly  begun  Reformation. 
As  in  the  mediaeval  tradition,  the  church  is called  thei"coetus" or  "congregatio 

42  Ernst Käsemann, Begründet der neutestamentliche  Kanon die Einheit der Kirche? In: 

Exegetische Versuche I, p. 214-223, Göttingen  1970. 

294 

sanctorum". Thanks  to the  research  of Jungmann  and  de  Lubac,43 it is generally 
accepted  today, that  the  terms  "coetus" and  "congregatio  sanctorum"  originally 
had  two  meanings: an  objective,  neutral  and  a personal  one: "congregatio  sanc(cid:173)
torum"  means  on  the  one  hand  the  participation  in  the  "sancta",  i. e. the  sacra-
ments,  on  the  other  hand  the  Community  of  saints,  sanctified  by  the  "sancta". 
The  Reformation  adopted  this  understanding  not  only  in  "Confessio  Augu(cid:173)
stana" 744  and  "Anglica"  1945, but  also  in  typically  reformed  confessions.  You 
know  the  famous  article 7  of  the  "Confessio  Augustana":  "the  church  is  the 
congregation  of  saints,  in  which  the  Gospel  is  purely  preached  and  the  sacra-
ments  rigthly  administered". 

For  example, we  read  in  the  "Gallica",  which  was  influenced  by  the  experi-
ence  of  persecution:  "We  say, then,  according  to  the  Word  of  God,  that  it  (the 
true  Church)  is the  Company  of  the  faithful,  who  agree  to  follow  his Word,  and 
the  pure  religion  which  it teaches; who  advance  in  it all their  lives, growing  and 
becoming  more  confirmed  in  the  fear  of  God  according  as they  feel  the want of 
growing  and  pressing  onward.  Even  although  they  strive  continually,  they  can 
have  no  hope  save  in  the  remission  of  their  sins."46 

The  "Helvetica  Posterior"  calls  the  "communio  sanctorum"  "a  communion 
... of  all saints  ... who  truly know and  rightly worship  and  serve the  true  God  in 
Christ  the  Saviour,  by  the  Word  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  who  by  faith  are  par-
takers  of  all  benefits  which  are  freely  offered  through  Christ."47  In  all  these 
definitions,  the  essential  difference  between  the  ecclesiology  of  the  Mediaeval 
Church  and  that  of  the  Reformation  is  clear: the  central  point  of  Reformation 
ecclesiology  is, that  the  Gospel  of Jesus-Christ  forms  the  constitutive  dement 
in the gathering  of  the  church. I just mentioned  the  "Confessio  Augustana"  arti(cid:173)
cle 7.48  The  "Anglica"  19  reads: 

"The  visible  church  ...  is  a  congregation  of  faithfull  men  in  the  which  the 
pure  Word  of  God  is  preached,  and  the  Sacramentes  be  duly  ministered."49 

43  J. A.Jungmann, Die Gnadenlehre  im Apostolischen  Glaubensbekenntnis. In: Gewor(cid:173)

dene Liturgie, Innsbruck-Leipzig  1941, p. 173-189. Henri de Lubac, L'Eucharistie  et 
l'Eglise au Moyen Age, Paris 1944 (Corpus Mysticum. Kirche und Eucharistie im Mit(cid:173)
telalter,  Einsiedeln  1969). Catholicisme. Les aspects sociaux du dogme (Unam Sanc-
tam vol.3), Paris  1952 (Glauben aus der Liebe, Einsiedeln  1970). Credo ... Sanctorum 
Communionem.  In: Internationale  Katholische  Zeitschrift  1 (1972), p. 18-32. 

44  Item  docent,  quod  una  Sancta  Ecclesia  perpetuo  mansura  sit.  Schaff  III,  p. 11, 

Art. VII. 

45  Ecclesia Christi uisibilis est coetus fidelium, in quo uerbum Dei purum praedicatur, et 
sacramenta,  quo  ad  ea quae  necessario  exiguntur,  iuxta  Christi  institutum  recte ad-
ministrantur.  Schaff III, p.499, Art. XIX. 

46  Cochrane,  p. 153f. Art.XXVII. 
47  Cochrane,  p.261, Art.XVII. 
48  See note 44. 
49  See note 45. 

295 

It is worth  mentioning  that  in  all these  Confessions  the  Gospel  is not  under-

stood  as  historical  news, but  as  a  liberating  and  existential  truth. 

2. Let  us  examine  briefly  the  "Harmonia's"  position  on  the  problem  of  the 
unity  and  freedom  of  the  Protestant  Churches.  Concerning  this  problem,  there 
had  been  a  far-reaching  agreement  on  the  principles,  but  great  differences  in 
matters  of  detail. The  "Harmonia"  shows  both  sides. The  unity  in  the  multiplic-
ity can  be  seen  insofar  as, theoretically  and  practically, the  famous  "Satis  est" of 
"Confessio  Augustana"  7 is  present  in  all  confessions: 

"And  unto  the  true  unity  of  the  Church,  it  is  sufficient  to  agree  concerning 
the  doctrine  of  the  Gospel  and  the  administration  of  the  Sacraments.  Nor is 
it  necessary  that  human  traditions,  rites,  or  ceremonies  instituted  by  men 
should  be  alike  everywhere."50 

The  "Harmonia"  makes  manifest,  that  this agreement  in  matters  of  principle 
was not  sufficient.  There  must  also be a  multiplicity  in  the unity.  In  dealing with 
this  ecclesiological  pluralism, I cannot  consider  all the  important  questions  aris-
ing  from  the  New  Testament  (the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  church  as  Spir(cid:173)
itual  organism,  the  common  priesthood  of  all  believers),  but  I  shall  deal  with 
those  questions  which  originated  in  the  historical  Situation  of  the  16th  Century 
and  demanded  immediate  answers.  Let  me  cite  3  examples: with  reference  to 
the  primacy  of  the  Pope,  the  "Anglica"  is  comparatively  neutral,  the  "Gallica" 
hard,  the  "Helvetica"  moderate.  The  "Anglica"  speaks  of  errors,51  the"Gallica" 
condemns  "the  papal  assemblies,  because  the  pure  Word  of  God  is  banished 
from  them",52  the  "Helvetica"  does  not  "approve  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Roman 
clergy,  who  make  their  Pope  at  Rome  the  universal  shepherd  and  supreme 
head".» 

"The  Helvetica  Posterior"  is  also  moderate  in  dealing  with  other  questions. 

Regarding  the  number  of  sacraments,  it 

"acknowledges  that  repentance,  the  Ordination  of  ministers  ...  and  matri-
mony  are  profitable  ordinances  of  God,  but  not  sacraments".5* "The  saints 

50  Schaff \l\, p.12. 
5'  "As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch, have erred,... not only in their 
living  and  manner  of  Ceremonies,  but  also  in  matters  of  Faith."  Schaff Hl, p. 499, 
Art. XIX. 

52  "Therefore  we condemn  the  papal assemblies  as the  pure Word  of  God  is banished 
from  them, their sacraments are corrupted, or falsified,  or destroyed, and all supersti-
tions and idolatries are in them. We hold, then, that all who take part in this acts, and 
commune  in that Church, separate and cut themselves off  from  the body of Christ." 
Cochrane, p. 154, Art. XXVIII. 

53  Cochrane, p.263, Art. XVII (Marg.: Christ the  Sole Head of the Church). 
54  Cochrane, p.277, Art.XIX (Marg.: The Number  of  Sacraments of the  New People). 

296 

are  not  to  be  adored, worshipped  or  invoked",  but  are  acknowledged  as "Irv(cid:173)
ing  members  of  Christ  and  friends  of  God."55 

V. 

We  started with  the  assumption,  that  "freedom  in  faith" was the  "call, mark  and 
sign"  of  the  Reformation.  If  the  assumption  is  correct,  the  idea  of  "freedom  in 
faith"  has  to  be  manifest  too  in  the  "Harmonia".  In  the  definition  of  "libertas 
christiana"  which  he  formulated  in  1520,  Luther  said: 

"Ein  Christenmensch  ist ein  freier  Herr  über  alle  Dinge  und  niemand  Unter(cid:173)
tan.  Ein  Christenmensch  ist  ein  dienstbarer  Knecht  aller  Dinge  und  jeder(cid:173)
mann  untertan."56 

Without  any  doubt,  we  find  here  the  deepest  kind  of  freedom,  the  root  of 
the  freedom  of  faith  and  conscience  and  with  it  the  basis  for  all  human  rights. 
This  concept  of  freedom  with  all  its  implications  (servum  arbitrium,  sola gratia, 
solus  Christus,  etc.), also  played  a  central  role  in  the  theology  of  the  reformed 
fathers.  Calvin  wrote  in  the  first  edition  of  the  "Institutio",  which  appeared  in 
1536, a long chapter  concerning "de libertate  christiana" which  he retained  with 
few  modifications  in  all  the  later  editions  of  "The  Institutes".57  Bullinger  de-
voted  the  29,h sermon  of  his  "Decades"  to  the  subject.  In  the  first  London  edi(cid:173)
tion  of  1577, the  sermon  was entitled: "Of  Christian  libertie, and  of  offences.  Of 
good  works  and  the  reward  there  of."58 

What  about  the  "libertas  christiana"  in  the  "Harmonia"?  It  deals  with  this 
theme  first  in section  VI "de reparatione  sev liberatione  hominis a lapsv per vni-
cum Jesum  Christum",59  and  then  again  in  section  IX  "de  ivstificatione  per  fi-
dem  deqve  bonis  operibvs  et  eorum  praemiis".60  That  "libertas  christiana"  oc-
cupies a central position  in  the  "Harmonia",  may be seen  in the way in which  it 
is  considered;  in  contrast  to  most  other  sections,  here  all  11  confessions  are 
taken  into  account,  and  section  IX  is  particularly  comprehensive,  devoting  60 
pages  to  the  subject. 

That  the  "libertas  christiana"  is  the  central  concern  of  the  "Harmonia",  is 
demonstrated  also  by  the  contents of  these  two  sections.  In  the  Christology  of 
section VI, the  term  "libertas" is  rather  rare. Instead  of  it,  one  finds  in  the  title 

55  Cochrane, p.231, Art.V. 
56  WA 7, 21,1-4. 
57  J.Calvin, OS I, p.223-283. 
58  H. Bullinger, Fiftie  godlie and learned  Sermons. London  1577. See J. Staedtke,  Hein(cid:173)

rich Bullinger, Bibliographie, I, Zürich  1972, Nr. 218. 

59  "Harmonia", p.97. 
60  "Harmonia", p. 165. 

297 

the  term  "liberatio".  The  whole  section  deals  primarily  with  the  "causa  effi-
ciens", respectively  the  "medium  seu  materia"  of  the  "liberatio", which  means: 
our  Lord Jesus-Christ.  In  connection  with  this  theme  it deals with  the  predesti-
nation, the  person  and  the work  of Jesus-Christ, including  his spiritual  presence 
and  the  Last  Judgement.  In  all  expositions  drawn  from  various  confessions, 
there  is a broad  agreement,  not  the  least, because  the  "Harmonia",  particularly 
in  considering  this  portion  of  doctrine,  relies  on  the  traditional  Creeds  of  the 
Church.  As  one  reads  in  the  "Helvetica  Posterior": 

"And,  to  say many  things  with  a few  words, with  a sincere  heart  we  believe, 
and  freely  confess  with  open  mouth,  whatever  things  are  defined  from  the 
Holy  Scriptures  concerning  the  mystery  of  the  incamation  of  our  Lord Je(cid:173)
sus-Christ,  and  are  summed  up  in  the  Creeds  and  decrees  of  the  first  four 
most  excellent  synods  convened  at  Nicaea,  Constantinople,  Ephesus  and 
Chalcedon  -  together  with  the  Creed  of  blessed  Athanasius,  and  all  similar 
Symbols; and  we  condemn  everything  contrary  to  these."61 

Just  as  we  find  damnations  in  the  Creeds  of  the  Ecumenical  Councils,  the 
"Harmonia"  contains  condemnations  of  the  16th Century  heretics, i.e.  of  Serve-
tus,  the  Anabaptists,  Schwenckfeld  and  sometimes  of  the  "Ubiquitarians".  Fur-
thermore, the  reformed  confessions  of  the  "Harmonia"  emphasize  the  Offices  of 
Christ.  In  article  11 "Concerning  Christ  the  Lord, and What  We  Have  Through 
Hirn",  the  "Helvetica  Prior"  of  1536  states  in  its  conclusion: 

"As  this  Lord Jesus  is  our  only  Mediator,  Advocate,  Sacrifice,  High  Priest, 
Lord  and  King,  we  acknowledge  him  alone  and  believe  with  all  our  hearts 
that  He  only  is  our  reconciliation,  our  redemption,  sanctification,  payment, 
wisdom,  defense  and  deliverance."62 

That  the  "Harmonia" grants  the  "libertas  christiana" a central  place is proved 
by  the  lengthy  consideration  of  the  problem  of  the  justification  by  faith. As  the 
"analytica  distributio"63  of  section  9  demonstrates,  there  are  three  main  prob-
lems: the  character  of  justifying  grace, the  definition  of  true  justifying  faith  and 
its relationship  to good  works as well as to the  problem  of the  true  obedience of 
the  faithful.  Nothing  could  show more  clearly  that  the  "Harmonia"  corresponds 
exactly  to  the  stress  laid  upon  "libertas  christiana"  in  the  works  of  Luther,  Cal(cid:173)
vin  and  Bullinger. 

What  does  this  mean?  According  to  Hans  Vorster,  this  emphasis  rests  upon 

the  presupposition,  that 

"erstens  die  Daseins-  und  Selbstverstehensweise  des  Menschen,  die  ihn  be-

61  Cochrane, p. 247, Art. XI. 
62  Cochrane, p. 104, Art.XI. 
63  "Harmonia", p.98. 

298 

sonders  charakterisiert,  nämlich  das  'esse  ex  operibus'  an  ihr  Ende  gekom(cid:173)
men  ist  und  dass  zweitens  das  unverfügbare  Dasein  und  Selbstverständnis 
des  'esse  gratiae'  durch  Gott  eröffnet  ist".04 

In  the  second  place, the  "Harmonia"  Stresses  the  faith,  i. e. the  liberating  as-
surance,  that  God  has  taken  our  salvation,  our  human  destiny  into  his  own 
hands.  The  Christian  faith  is  not,  according  to  the  "Helvetica  Posterior", 

"an  opinion  or  human  conviction,  but  a  most  firm  trust  and  a  clear  and 
steadfast  assent  of  the  mind,  and  then  a  most  certain  apprehension  of  the 
truth  of  God  presented  in  the  Scriptures  and  in  the  Apostles'  Creed".65 

The  character  of  faith  as a gift  is given  even greater  emphasis  in another  pas-

sage  of  the  "Helvetica  Posterior": 

"Therefore,  because  faith  receives  Christ  our  righteousness  and  attributes 
everything  to  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ,  on  that  account  justification  is 
attributed  to  faith,  chiefly  because  of  Christ  and  not  therefore  because  it  is 
our  work.  For it is  the  gift  of  God  ...  Moreover,  the  Lord  abundantly  shows 
that we receive Christ  by faith  in John, eh. 6, where  he  puts  eating for  believ-
ing, and  believing  for  eating.  For as we  receive  food  by  eating, so we  partici-
pate  in  Christ  by  believing."66 

In  the  third  place,  the  "Harmonia"  deals  with  the  good  works  as  fruits  of 
faith.  It  would  lead  us  too  far,  to  show  in  detail  the  füll  consequences  of  the 
"libertas  christiana"  for  the  Christian  life:  they  are  considered  in  all  the  confes-
sions  of  the  16th Century. Then  as now  the  Christian  life  begins with  spontane-
ous  willing,  and  joyous  Service;  and  is  characterized  by  an  inner  freedom  in 
every  "Sitz  im  Leben".  This  life  shows  both  regard  for  the  weak  and  a willing-
ness  to  avow  our  own  weakness. 

Let  me  conclude  by  once  again  drawing  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the 
discussion  of  freedom  in  the  reformed  confessions  of  the  16th  Century,  espe-
cially in  the  "Harmonia  confessionum  fidei", sought  to achieve a double goal. It 
was  my  desire, as a historian,  to  acquaint  you  with  this  interesting  effort  on  the 
part  of  the  reformed  churches,  to  attempt  to  assemble  all  the  churches  of  the 
Reformation  in a difficult  time. It is of course possible  to say, that  this effort  was 
only  an  illusion.  I  do  not  share  this  opinion. 

Salvard  and  his  helpers  and  friends  were  not  Utopians,  but  rather  realists. 
They  were  not  theorists  of  a  sterile  orthodoxy,  but  practitioners  of  brotherly 
love. Their  desire was to  progress  from  the  experience  of  freedom  to  the  postu-

64  Hans Vorster, Das Freiheitsverständnis bei Thomas von Aquin und Luther, Göttingen 

1963, p. 393. 

63  Cochrane, p.257, Art.XVI. 
66  Cochrane,  p. 2 56, Art. XV. 

299 

lates  of  truth.  They  shared  with  many  contemporaries  the  view  of  the  Apostle 
Paul:  "our  knowledge  now  is  partial"  (1 Cor.  13, 12).  Therefore,  they  did  not 
seek to damn  others, but  to find  harmony  among believers. Of  course it is possi-
ble  to  accuse  them  of  neglecting  the  real  issues  which  divided  the  churches  of 
the  Reformation  by  putting  together  a  series  of  carefully  selected  sections  of 
their  confessions:  One  can argue  that  an  Interpretation  should  have  been  added 
to  this  compilation. Yet  I imagine  that  they  were  fully  aware  of  the  tension  be-
tween  spirit  and  letter,  not  only  in  the  Gospel,  but  all  the  more  with  regard  to 
human  confessions. 

It  is  not  just  by  chance  that  the  reformed  French,  Dutch  and  Swiss  sup-
ported  the  framing  of  the  "Harmonia":  they  lived  in  countries  where  the  battle 
for  political  and  Spiritual  freedom  was  being  fought;  and  they  stood  in  a  tradi-
tion  which  had  come  to  know  that  all  kinds  of  freedom  were  interrelated. 

As a theologian,  I hope  that  my paper  will aid  in  continuing  the  ecumenical 
dialogue.  Should  this  dialogue  really  make  progress, it  cannot  be  limited  to  the 
Lutherans, Anglicans,  Orthodox  and  Rome. As  in  the  days of  the  16th  Century, 
the  Reformed  Churches  still  have  an  important  contribution  to  make:  it  is 
genuine  reformed  catholicity. 

Prof. Dr. Fritz  Büsser, Institut  für  Schweizerische  Reformationsgeschichte,  Kirchgasse 9, 
8001 Zürich 

300 

