The  Bern  Disputation:  Some  Observations 

by  D AN  L.  H E N D B I G KS 

The  Bern  Disputation  of  1528 is largely a  product  of ideas  conceived  in 
other  places  and  sponsored  by  Outsiders.  Even  the  ten  theses,  issued  by 
reformers  Berchtold  Haller  and  Franz  Kolb,  reflect  dependence  upon  the 
theology  of  Zwingli  and  antagonism  to  Catholic  theology,  enunciated  by 
John  Eck  at  Baden.  Recent  scholarship  has  explored  the  influence  of 
Zwinglii,  but  showed  less  concern  for  the  negative  role  of  Baden2.  Both 
factors'  impact  on  the  Bern  reformation  settlement  needs  reassessment. 
Therefore,  this article3 offers  a  few  observations  on the  debt  to Zürich  and 
the  Opposition  to  Baden. 

The  decision  by  the  Bern  City  Council  on  November  17,  1527,  to 
convene  a  disputation  represents  the  government's  response  to  a  deepen-
ing social  crisis, occasioned  by  the  clash  of the  old and  new  beliefs4.  From 
the  introduction  of evangelical  preaching  in  the  early  1520's5 to  the  near 
riotous  Situation  in  the  city  of Bern  in  15276, the  Council  had  cautiously 

1  Cf.  Ulrich Gabler, Huldrych Zwingli im 20. Jahrhundert, Forschungsbericht  und 
annotierte Bibliographie 1897-1972, Zürich 1975, No. 474,629,1037; Gottfried W. Lo(cid:173)
cher, Zwingiis Schlußpredigt an der Berner Disputation  als Beitrag zu seiner  Ethik, 
in:  Humanität  und  Glaube,  Gedenkschrift  für  Kurt  Guggisberg,  hg.  von  Ulrich 
Neuenschwander und  Rudolf Dellsperger,  Bern  1974, 29—41. 

2 Leonhard  von  Muralt  offered  new  perspective  on  the  Bern  Disputation  by 
examining the political-religious Standpoint of the Catholic cantons as they attempt-
ed to keep Bern  in their  coalition  and isolate it from the influence of Zürich, see Die 
Badener Disputation, Leipzig 1926 (Quellen und Abhandlungen zur Schweizerischen 
Reformationsgeschichte  3).  See  also  Johann  Lippert,  Die  Einladung  Zwingiis  an 
Johann  Eck  zum  Berner  Religionsgespräch,  in:  Zwingliana VI,  1938,  580-588; 
Gottfried W.Locher, Die  theologische  und  politische  Bedeutung  des  Abendmahls(cid:173)
streites  im  Licht von  Zwingiis Briefen,  in: Zwingliana XIII,  1971, 281-304. 

3  My thanks to Pierre Fraenkel and  Gottfried W. Locher for their suggestions on 
the  occasion  of  the  presentation  of  this  paper,  Monday,  November 22,  1976, at  a 
Colloquium  of  the  Institute  of  the  History  of  the  Reformation,  University  of 
Geneva,  Geneva,  Switzerland. 

4 The convocation  and ten theses  are edited in: Aktensammlung zur  Geschichte 
der  Berner  Reformation  1521-1532, hg. von  Rudolf  Steck und  Gustav Tobler, Bern 
1923, No. 1371, 518-521 (cited:  ABernerRef). 

5 We  know that  a  Bernese  book  dealer  visits  Basel  on  December 24,  1518, and 
buys a number of works by Luther. The incident is reported by Beatus Rhenanus in 
a  letter  to Zwingli, December 26,  1518, Z VII  123it. 

6 Haller  claims  that  several  of  the  guild  parishes  throw  out  the  Mass  in  the 
autumn of 1527 and about the same time some local priests openly declare that they 

565 

monitored  religious developments7.  In  need  of a  church  settlement  radical 
enough  to  placate  a  broadening  evangelical  oonsensus  at  home,  and  also 
anxious  to  present  a  religious  program  moderate  enough  to  satisfy  the 
Catholic Confederate  cantons  abroad,  the  Council guardedly  promulgated 
a  series  of  reformation  laws8. 

By  the  summer  of  1523,  Bernese  evangelicals  exerted  considerable 
influence  in  local  church  life.  Their  new  ideas  were  being  spread  by  a 
growing  number  of  preachers,  and  key  ecclesiastical  posts  were  occupied 
by  reform -minded  clergymen9.  Despite  the  political  and  religious  conser-
vatism  of  the  ruling  "oligarchy1 0",  which  had  forbidden  local  priests  to 
participate  in the  Zürich  debates,  changes were occurring11.  Foliowing  the 
lead  of  Zürich  and  Basel,  the  Council  issued  a  mandate  on  J u ne  15, 
152312.  In  light  of  the  confusion  created  by  the  introduction  of  the  new 
ways  by  some  and  the  maintenance  of  the  old  by  others,  the  law  was 

are  married,  Z IX  232f. Leonhard von Muralt  believes that  the  action  of the  guild 
parishes  actually  forces  the  hand  of the  eonservative  Small Council. Without  this 
factor, he suggests, a Disputation  might never have taken place, Stadtgemeinde und 
Reformation  in  der  Schweiz,  in:  Zeitschrift  für  Schweizer  Geschichte  10,  1930, 
349-384. 

7 The  Bern government  was not  above intervening in  church  affairs  to  ensure  a 
proper  hearing  for  its  interests.  See the  affair  of  the  installation  of the  Bishop of 
Lausanne  in  1471,  Emil  Blösch,  Die  Vorreformation  in  Bern,  in:  Jahrbuch  für 
Schweizerische  Geschichte  9,  1884,  1-92.  The  gradual  process  by  which  the  Bern 
Council  assumed  responsibility  for the  monitoring of religious affairs  has partly  to 
do  with  the  default  of  episcopal  authorities  in  these  matters.  For  an  analysis  of 
church-state relations on the eve of the Reformation  see Gerold, Meyer von  Knonau, 
Zur Vorgeschichte der Berner Reformation, in: Zwingliana III,  1918/1919, 396-404. 
8  Because of the broad powers and eonservative persuasion of the Small Council, 
it  served  for  a  long  time  as  a  brake  upon  sudden  and  radical  change.  One  major 
reason, which is often  overlooked, is the diplomatic issue. Bern was always anxious 
to  maintain  a  viable  relationship  with  its  Confederates.  When  the  Confederation 
split in two, Bern was caught in the middle. Even after the Disputation, it continued 
to  seek  cordial  relationships with  its neighbors, this primarily for defensive  purpo-
ses. See Bernd Moeller's discussion of the role of magistrates in the Reformation,  in: 
Imperial Cities and the  Reformation  (English translation,  Philadelphia  1972)  61f. 
9  In  the  city  for  example,  Sebastian  Meyer  was  lecturing  on  the  Bible  in  the 
Franciscan  Monastery,  Nikiaus  Manuel,  the  gifted  artist  and  dramatist,  counted 
himself in the evangelical camp, Thomas von Wattenwyl, a close friend and follower 
of  Zwingli,  was  provost  of  St. Vincent  Cathedral,  and  Berchtold  Haller  was  the 
people's  preacher. 

io « Oligarchy" is the name given by Haller to the elite  group  of  magistrates, all 
noblemen,  in  the  Small Council, whose inertia  nearly  prevented  the  calling  of  the 
Disputation. 

11 Sebastian  Meyer went  anyway. 
12 ABernerRef 249. 

566 

designed  to  establish  theological  uniformity  in preaching  and  teaching.  It 
prescribed  adherence  to  the  Bible  as  the  sole  source  of  proclamation1 3. 

However,  faced  with  the  intransigent  conservatism  of  the  Bernese 
country  folk  and  the  increasing  militance  of the  evangelicals,  the  authori-
ties  retreated  from  the  innovative  implications  of the  first  law  and  voted 
in  the  so-ealled  Reformationsartikel  on  April  7,  152514.  Framed  in  Coop(cid:173)
eration  with  several  other  cantons  of  Catholic  persuasion,  the  articles 
outlawed  the  unorthodox  celebration  of the  eucharist,  advised  adherence 
to  the  traditional  understandings  of the  Mass  and  Purgatory,  and  warned 
against  clerical  marriage15. 

By  1526  the  canton  of  Bern  was  still  "officially"  Catholic.  The  initial 
successes  of  the  reform  party  had  been  nulhfied  by  the  banishment  or 
resignation  of  talented  men  like  Sebastian  Meyer  and  Nikiaus  von  Wat-
tenwyl1 6.  Even  Berchtold  Haller's  continued  leadership  was  not  certain, 
since  he  had  been  nearly  ousted  from  his  preaching  post  by  detractors1 7. 
Another  crippling  blow was  dealt  the  cause  of reform,  when  on  May  21, a 
mandate  censored  all  evangelical  literature,  threatening  prosecution  to 
offenders18. 

On the  same day  the  Baden  Disputation  opened.  Sponsored by  the  "old 
Catholic"  cantons, and  spearheaded  by J o hn  Eck,  the debate was  planned 
in  order  to  consolidate  Swiss  Opposition  to  the  new  doctrine  and  more 
specifically,  to  "silence" Zwingli  and  "turn  the people from  their  error1 9". 

13 Ibid., p. 66: " Nämlich, das ir, und alle die, so sich predigens underziehend und 
gebruohend,  nützid  anders,  dann  allein  das heylig  evangelium,  und  die leer  gottes 
frey,  offenlich,  und unverborgen  ..." 

14 Ibid.,  610.  Legislation  in  religious  matters  involved  an  elaborate  prooess  of 
negotiation  between looal oommunities and the  City  Council of  Bern. Por  example 
see ABernerRef  882, 891,  892. 

15 Ibid.,  610.  On  matters  like  belief  in  Purgatory,  prayers  and  masses  for  the 
dead,  and  pilgrimages,  compulsion  was  forbidden;  the  people  were  to  choose  for 
themselves.  The  law  mentions  the  presence  of  dissension  among  the  clergy  and 
suggests that  in certain  areas iconoclasm  had become a problem  (p. 192). 

16 For  an  account  of the  ousting  of  Meyer  see Die  Berner  Chronik  des  Valerius 
Anshelm,  hg.  vom  Historischen  Verein  des  Kantons  Bern,  vol. V, Bern 1896,  58f. 
(cited:  Anshelm);  ABernerRef  II  152.  Nikiaus  von  Wattenwyl  leaves  his  post  to 
marry an ex-nun, Klara May. See Anshelm V 121. 

17  Vadian alludes to the Opposition to Haller in a letter to the Bernese  Reformer, 
June  13, 1526. Die Vadianische  Briefsammlung  der  Stadtbibliothek  St. Gallen, hg. 
von Emil  Arbenz, vol. IV,  Saint  Gall  1897, No. 461, 30. 

«  ABernerRef  892, p.  314f. 
19  Amtliehe Sammlung der altern  eidgenössischen Abschiede aus dem  Zeiträume 
von  1521  bis  1528,  vol. IV/la,  bearbeitet  von  Johannes  Strickler,  Brugg  1873, 
No. 354,  p. 869i:  "...  damit  der  Zwingli  und  sins  glichen  in  unser  Eidgnoschaft 
irer  falschen  leer  geschweigt  und  etlicher  maß  das  gmein volk von  der  irrthumb 

567 

Bern's  only  clerical  representative,  Berchtold  Haller,  made  no  secret  of 
his  Opposition  to  Eck's  seven  theses.  Indeed,  he  challenged  Eck  on  the 
second thesis, that  the  body  and  blood of Christ are offered  in the Mass  for 
the  living  and  the  dead2 0. 

In  the  absence  of Zwingli,  Oekolampad  argued  the  Protestant  case,  but 
the  partisan  crowd  adopted  all seven theses, which  were  skillfully  defend-
ed  by  Eck.  Whatever  polemical  success  the  Catholic  cantons  enjoyed  by 
the  Disputation,  they  nonetheless  lost  a  coveted  ally.  Offended  by  the 
harsh  condemnatory  tone  of  the  debate  minutes,  which  severly  indicted 
Zürich  and  Zwingli,  Bern  disavowed  any  support  for  the  Baden  settle-
ment2 1. 

Back  home,  Haller  was  ordered  to  appear  before  the  Small  Council  and 
justify  his  refusal  to  say  the  Mass  in  St. Vincent  Cathedral.  A  favorite 
with  the  people,  especially  guildsmen,  the  preacher  was  ensured  a  fair 
hearing by mobs of Citizens who noisily gathered  outside the  city hall.  The 
Large  Council,  with  its  guild  majority,  acquitted  Haller2 2.  Not  only  was 
the  decision  an  implicit  mandate  for  change,  it  had  also  become  an 
evangelical  cause  celebre.  In  the  months  following,  elections  delivered  a 
majority  to  councilmen  favorable  to  reform23.  Moreover,  a  canvas  of 
opinion  throughout  the  canton  showed  growing  sympathy  for  change24. 
At  the  same  time  the  viability  of  Opposition  to  reform,  centered  politi-
cally  in  the  Small  Council,  was  seriously  threatened.  We  know,  for  exam-

abgewendt  und  rüewig  gemacht  werd."  The  document  is a  dispatch  from  Lucern 
to  the  Bishop  of  Constance about  the  Baden  Debate. 

20  Haller  had  to  be  released  from  his  oath  to  the  Mandate  of  Pfingstmontag, 
which forbad disputation on the Mass, before he could debate. He contested the real 
presence  with  a  basically  Zwinglian  notion  of  the  sole  sufficiency  of  the  Lord's 
sacrifice on the cross. See Die disputacion vor den XII orten einer loblichen eidtgno-
schafft,  edited by  Thomas Murner,  Lucerne  1526, f.T2. 

21 ABernerRef  1084, p. 363f. 
22 According to  Anshelm V  172 there  was nearly a riot.  He relates that  Haller's 
defense was so impressive that no one spoke against him. He was relieved of his duty 
to  say Mass but  retained  as preacher in the  Cathedral. 

23 Report  of the  elections  comes in  a letter  from  Haller  to  Zwingli  on April 25, 

1527. It  is also recounted  by  Anshelm V 199. 

24 The government asked its constituent  communities to consider the Mandate of 
Viti and Modesti  and  the  Reformation  Articles.  The  people showed preference  for 
the  Biblical  mandate;  only  six  endorsed  the  more  conservative  law.  ABernerRef 
1196, p. 398^00  and  1205, p. 403-427. The response became the  basis for the  final 
reformation  law before  the  Disputation.  The  Mandat  of  May 27,  1527 embodies  a 
theological contradiction, because it stipulates both the unhindered preaching of the 
Gospel and adherence to the traditional ways. Its framers realize this  contradiction; 
ABernerRef  1221, p. 435-437. 

568 

ple,  that  by  October  31,  1527,  four  Bernese  communities  had  stopped 
celebrating the Mass25. In  the  city of Bern  several of the guild  associations 
had  also  abolished  the  Mass,  so  that  on  November  4,  Haller  writes  to 
Zwingli,  reporting  that  the  shoemakers,  weavers,  merchants, 
fishermen, 
stonemasons  and  carpenters  had  all  thrown  out  the  liturgy2 6. 

Under  these  ciroumstances  the  Small  Council  could  stall  no  longer.  On 
November  15,  the  government  decided  to  hold  its  own  Disputation  in 
order  to  facilitate  a  stable  religious  Solution  based  upon  Community 
theological  consensus.  Two  days  later,  the  official  announcement  of  the 
debate  was  issued,  including  a  list  of  ten  theses.  The  Disputation  would 
convene  on  January  6,  1528. 

Before  we  examine  the  ten  theses,  a  brief  look  at  the  political  and 
theological uses of the Disputation, what Bernd Moeller  calls  Disputations(cid:173)
politik,  will  be  helpful.  We  should  first  note  the  pervasive  influence  of 
Zwingli  on  Berchtold  Haller27.  The  Bernese  reform er  had  considered 
Zwingli  his  teacher  and  master  since  152128.  Haller  actively  solicited  the 
Züricher's  advice on matters  ranging from  the  deeply personal  to  the  high 
professional.  They  conferred  on  the  role  of  magistrates,  the  baptism  of 
children,  the  marriage  of priests and  the  problem  of Anabaptists.  Charged 
with  the  Organization  of  the  Disputation,  Haller  sought  the  advice  of 
Zwingli  on  the  selection  of  participants  and  submitted  his  theses  for 
Zwingli's approval2 9. It  is no surprise, then,  t h at  striking similarities  exist 
between  the  Zürich  and  Bern  Debates. 

Like  its  predecessors  the  Zürich  Debates,  the  Bern  Disputation  in-
volved  not  only  the  search  for  truth,  but  also  a  transfer  of  power30. 

25 The  communities  were  Rohrbach,  Langnau,  Bolligen  and  Rüderswil.  See 
especially  letters  of  Rohrbach  and Langnau  in ABernerRef  1242 and  1357, respec-
tively. 

26 Z  I X,  No.  664,  292f. 
27  See  note  1  above. 
2«  Cf.  Z  V I I,  No.  194,  196. 
29  " Ich  bitt  dich,  du  wellist  die artikel  mitsambt dem titel trewlich besichtigen, 
endern,  bessern,  darzu  darvon  thun,  nach  dem  dich  am  alerbesten  dunkt."  Z IX 
309i9_2i  (cf.  p. 634). 

30 In two major  articles, Bernd Moeller has explored the  character of the  Zürich 
Debates and the parallel uses of the politicized disputation in Germany and Switzer-
land.  In  the  first  article  Zwingiis  Disputationen,  Studium  zu  den  Anfängen  der 
Kirchenbildung  und  des  Synodalwesens  im  Protestantismus,  I.Teil, in:  Zeitschrift 
der  Savigny-Stiftung  für  Rechtsgeschichte  87 (Kanonistische  Abteilung  56), 1970, 
275-324, Moeller discovers a basic "Erfindung" on  the medieval, academic disputa(cid:173)
tion.  Zwingli  modifies  the  medieval  debate,  making  it  more  of  a  proclamatory 
occasion than an exploratory one. Moreover, he uses the disputation to establish and 
consolidate the evangelical church in the city and the canton. The Debates  facilitate 

569 

Guided  and  legitimized  by  Scriptural  norm,  the  Bern  reformation  shifted 
executive power in matters  of doctrine and practical piety from  bishops  to 
magistrates3 1.  It  ushered  in  a  new  theocratic32  order  modeled  on  the 
Zwinglian  reform  program  in  Zürich.  For  these  reasons,  I  call  the  Bern 
Debate  an  "occasion  of  state". 

To  understand  the  theocratic  character  of  the  Bern  Reformation,  one 
other  event  besides  the  Disputation  must  be  mentioned.  Less  than  a 
month  after  the  end  of the  Debate,  the  Council issued  the  Reformations(cid:173)
mandat3 3.  All  male  Citizens  fourteen  years  and  older  were  required  to 
make  an  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  law.  The  mandate  of  thirteen  articles 
was the  executive  apparatus  of the new  evangelical  State. Based  upon  the 
theological  results  of  the  Disputation,  it  was  a  declaration  of  indepen-
dence  from  Roman  episcopal  power34  and  doctrine3 5.  It  prescribed  obe-
dience to  the  ten  theses  and  abolished  the  celebration  of the  Mass and  the 
worship  of  images. 

The  first  Suggestion  of  the  civil-ecclesiastical  uses  of  the  Disputation 
comes  in  the  convocation  statement.  Unlike  the  medieval,  academic 
debate,  which  occasioned  the  promotion  of  the  theological  Student,  the 
Bern  Disputation  was  convened  to  solve  a  Community  problem.  In  the 
statement  mention  was  made  of  previous  attempts  to  quell  the  distur-
bance  and  establish  peace.  By  the  event,  the  government  hoped  to  rees-
tablish  doctrinal  consensus  and  uniformity  of  worship;  " . ..  t h at  divine 

the change from the Catholic to the evangelical order, formalizing the new program 
under the guidance and diotates of the Scriptural rubric. The result is a theocracy in 
which the civil and ecclesiastical functions  are merged under the auspices of the City 
Council and legitimized by the inspiration  of the  Holy Spirit. In the second part  of 
the article (ibid. 91, 1974, 213-364) he surveys the uses of "Disputationspolitik"  in 
German and Swiss cities. See in particular  Otto Scheib, Die theologischen  Diskussio(cid:173)
nen  Huldrych  Zwingiis, Zur  Entstehung  und  Struktur  der  Religionsgespräche  des 
16. Jahrhunderts, in: Von Konstanz nach Trient, Beiträge zur Geschichte der Barche 
von  den Reformkonzilien  bis zum  Tridentinum,  Festgabe für  August  Franzen, hg. 
von  Bemigius Bäumer, Munioh/Paderborn/Vienna  1972, 395—417, pursues the prac(cid:173)
tical implications of Moeller's thesis. He submits that the Debates efiect the consen(cid:173)
sus in theology and practice, which is the foundation  of the new  order. 

31 The practical aspects of the transfer  of power  are elaborated  in the  Reforma(cid:173)

tionsmandat,  ABernerRef  1513, p. 629-634. 

32  See, for  example,  Robert 0. Walton, Zwingli's Theocracy,  Toronto  1967. 
33 In  fact  there  were two oaths  made: the  first  was sworn  on  February 2, 1528. 
The people pledged to  guard,  protect  and  carry  out present  and  future  actions, of 
worldly  and  religious  import,  handed  down by  the  Council.  On February 7,  they 
pledged to obey the thirteen articles of the Reformation  Mandate. The mandate was 
written  by Zwingli. See Z VI/1502f. 

34 See articles 2 and  3 of the Mandate, ABernerRef  630f. 
35 Ibid., article  1, 630. 

570 

truth,  Christian  understanding  and  belief  be  discovered,  and  worship 
grounded  in  divine  Scripture  be  planted  an  dobserved3 6."  The  conveners 
also  aimed  to  serve  "Christian  peace,  calm  and  unity3 7".  As  we  have 
suggested  the  model  for  magisterial  action  was  Zürich's  program  and  the 
inspiration,  Zwingli's. 

Argued  in  a  letter  to  Ambrose  Blarer  and  actualized  in  the  institution-
alization  of  reform  in  his  oity,  Zwingli  defended  a  council's  right,  indeed 
responsibility,  to supervise religious affairs,  insofar  as it was Christian  and 
founded  upon  a  degree  of  Community  consensus38.  Although  the  magis-
trate  exercised  executive  power  to  insure  a  peaceful  society,  where  the 
Gospel  could  be preached  and  faith  could  flourish,  a  more  basio  authority 
belonged  to  the  Community. 

Equating  the  church  and  the  body  politic, Zwingli saw the  "kirch"  as  a 
gathering  of  believers  in  a  specific  geographical  area,  like  Zürich  or 
Bern3 9.  Each  "kirchgemeind"  possessed  authority  to  determine  true  doc-
trine  and  faithful  practice.  Opposed  to  the  idea  t h at  only  a  Council  of 
bishops  and  prelates  could  legislate  doctrine,  he  affirmed  that,  obedient 
to  the  divine  Word  of  Scripture  and  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  local 
congregation  acts  as  ecclesia  representativa10.  Zwingli  used  this  ecclesiolo-
gy  to  justify  the  Zürich  Debate. 

The  same  theological  framework  informed  the  execution  of  the  Bern 
Disputation.  In  the  first  debate  on  the  nature  and  authority  of  the 
Church,  Haller  argued  that  the  local  church  Community  owes  its  origin 
and  existence  solely  to  God.  It  is  subject  alone  to  the  lordship  of 
Christ  and  the  Spirit  alone  leads  the  church  in  a  virtuous  and  righteous 
Christian  life41.  The  Spirit  commissions  faithful  communities  like  Bern 
to  govern  themselves.  Their  decisions  are  tested  and  legitimized  by 
the  radical  Standard,  sola  Scriptura, 
because  the  Bible  is  the  clear 
word  of  God. 

Already  in  the  convocation  statement,  the  Bern  Council  advised  t h at 
no other  source be  cited  in support  of arguments,  except  the  Word  of  God 

36 Convocation:  " . ..  den grund  göttlicher  warheit,  christenlicher  Verstands  und 
gloubens  fürzebringen  und  dem  nach  ze  laben,  rechtgeschaffen  und  in  göttlicher 
geschrift  gegründt  gotzdienst  ze pflanzen  und  üben", ibid. 517. 

37  Ibid. 
38 Z IX  456^58. 
39  See the  excellent  article  by  Robert G. Walton, The  Institutionalization  of  the 
Reformation  at  Zürich,  in:  Zwingliana  XIII,  1972, 497-515. Walton  analyzes  the 
relationship  of church and  Community in Zwingli's  thought. 

40 Auslegen und  Gründe  der  Schlußreden, Z II  6223. 
41 Handlung  oder  Acta  gehaltener  Disputation  zu  Bernn  in  üchtland,  Zürich 

1528. See especially the  exchange between Träger  and  Bucer,  f.20r-36v. 

571 

recorded  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments:  "Alone  Biblical  text  with 
Biblical text  clarified,  explained,  compared and  the difficult  texts illumi-
nated  by  the  clear42."  Furthermore,  the  validity  of  the  Reformation 
Mandate was also grounded in the claim that its directives measured up to 
the  Scriptural  rubric:  "that  the  same are  Christian  and  grounded  in  and 
supported  by  divine  Scripture43."  It  was  to  such  a  vision  of  Christian 
society  that  Bucer admonished  the  Bernese in  debate  on the  first  thesis. 
They listened  closely, for  soon they  would  have  it. 

The ten  theses bring into focus  the  specific  problems with  which  Bern 
wrestled,  since  the  introduction  of  evangelical  preaching  in  1518. Con-
stantly in touch with the magistrates, Haller predicted in early November 
1527,  that  the  Council  would  eventually  rule  on  the  issues:  the  Mass, 
images, the  intercession  of the  saints, Purgatory  and  clerical marriage44. 
The new theology had called these practices into question and  evangelical 
preachers  had  exposed  abuses  associated  with  them.  Sebastian  Meyer, 
Nikiaus  Manuel,  George  Brunner,  Haller  and  Kolb  were  some  of  those 
who  protested. 

To be sure, the theses not only express Bernese problems, they also bear 
the  theological  imprint  of  other  Swiss-German  Disputations.  For  in-
stance,  Schuhmann  has  traced  six of  the  Bern  propositions  to  the  Ilanz 
Debate  of  1526  and  two  of  them  to  the  Basel  Disputation  of  152445. 
Furthermore,  Locher  has  noticed  the  Inspiration  of  Zwingli  in  both  the 
Ilanz  and  Bern  Debates46. I  also submit  that five of the  Bern theses  are 
framed  in  explicit  Opposition  to five of Eck's  Baden  theses47. 

First,  the  positive  contribution  of  the  Bernese  propositions  is  Zwin(cid:173)
glian.  It  is  mediated  through  John  Comander,  pastor  in  Chur,  who  au-
thors  the  Ilanz  theses.  Gottfried  Locher  suggests  that  Comander's  first 
thesis, which is adopted  by  Haller  and  Kolb, is Zwinglian in  "spirit  and 
style".  In  fact,  we  can  extend  this  theory  to  all  the  other  Ilanz  theses 
taken  over  by  the  Bernese.  Haller  and  Kolb  model  six  of their  proposi(cid:173)
tions  after  Comander's  because  in  them  they  find  strong,  incisive  State(cid:173)
ments  of the master's theology.  Comander's  close relationship to  reform-

42  Convocation:  "...  allein  biblisch  geschrift  mit  biblischer  erklärt,  usgeleit, 
verglichet, und  die dunckle mit  der heitern erluchtet...", ABernerRef  1371, p. 519. 

<« Mandate, ibid. 630. 
44 Z IX  29328_80. 
45 Georg Schuhmann,  Die "große" Disputation zu Bern, in: Zeitschrift für schwei(cid:173)

zerische Kirchengeschichte  3,  1909, 210-215. 

46 Gottfried  W.Locher,  Die Stimme  des Hirten,  in:  Oskar Farner,  Erinnerungen, 

Zürich  1954 (Zwingli-Bücherei  68), 113-115. 

47  See the  comparative  chart. 

572 

ers  like  Zwingli  and  Bullinger  also  argues  well  for  a  line  of  theological 
ancestry  extending  from  Zürich  through  Ilanz  to  Bern4 8. 

In  addition,  Haller  almost  certainly  used  the  Bern  Debate  as  an  oppor-
tunity  to  discredit  the  ideas  adumbrated  in  Baden.  After  all,  he  never 
concealed  his  fundamental  Opposition  to  Eck's  theses.  Thus,  Bern  theses 
numbers  4,  5,  6,  7 and  8 are  probably  explicit  refutations  of  their  Baden 
counterparts,  numbers  1,  2,  3,  5  and  4.  In  light  of  the  near  identical 
sequence,  the  relationship  seems  more  than  accidental.  Eck  affirms  the 
corporal  presence  in the  sacrament;  Haller  and  Kolb  reject  it.  Eck  asserts 
the  efficacy  of  the  Mass  for  the  living  and  the  dead;  the  Bernese  contend 
that  this  negates  the  sole  sufficiency  of  Christ's  salvific  death.  Eck  pro-
poses  t h at  Mary  and  the  saints  are  prayed  to  as  intercessors;  the  reform -
ers insist  upon  the  sole mediation  of Christ.  Eck  affirms  the use of images; 
Haller  and  Kolb  would  abolish  them  if  they  become  objects  of  worship. 
Finally,  Eck  claims the  existence  of Purgatory  after  this  life;  the  Bernese 
reject  is  as  being  unscriptural. 

The  extent  to  which  the  Bern  theses  are  composed  in  terms  of  previous 
Swiss  Disputations  in  Zürich,  Ilanz  and  Basel,  and  against 
the  one  in 
Baden,  indicates  the  theological  bias  of  Haller  and  Kolb.  In  the  Bern 
Debate  evangelical  theology  of Swiss-Zwinglian  type  would  dominate  the 
proceedings  and  finally  vanquish  both  Catholic  and  Lutheran  alterna(cid:173)
tives.  By  their  careful  composition  of  the  ten  revolutionary  Statements, 
Haller  and  Kolb  set  the  polemical  stage  and  anticipated  its  theological 
denouement. 

48  Commander's  theses  are  a  theological  Synopsis  of  the  67 articles  of  Zwingli, 
concerning  the  Ilanz  Disputation  cf.  Emil  Caraenisch, Mitarbeit  der  Laien  bei 
Durchführung  der Bündner Reformation, in: Zwingliana VII, 1942, 432^136. Notice 
the theological affinity  between Ilanz thesis 1 and Zwingli's Adversus  Hieronymum 
Emserum antibolon, Z I II  2688-io; theses 2-3 and Auslegen und Gründe der Schluß(cid:173)
reden, articles  11 and  16; thesis  12 and articles  19 and 20; thesis  14 and article 18; 
thesis  16 and  article 18. 

573 

A  C O M P A R A T I VE  A N A L Y S IS  OF  T HE  B E RN  T H E S ES 

Ilanz  Theses: January  1526 

Baden  Theses:  May  1526 

Bern  Theses: January  1528 

1.  Die  Christenlich  kylch,  ist  uß 
dem  wort  Gottes  erboren,  imm 
selben  sol  sy  blyben,  und  nitt 
hören  die  stimm  eines  anderen. 

2.  Die  kylch  Christi  machet  nitt 
gesatzt,  one  Gottes  wort,  sunder 
sy  hört  was  der  gmahel  Christus 
gesetzt  und  gebotten  hat,  sy  were 
sunst  vil minder,  dann  die  Judisch 
Synagog. 

3.  Uß  disem  volgt,  das  die  Oren-
bycht,  und  ir  glychen,  so  man 
nempt  kylchen  gebott,  nitt  wyter 
bindent,  dann  sy  imm  göttlichen 
wort  gegründet  und  gebotten 
sind. 

1.  Die  heilig  Christenlich  kilch, 
deren  einig  houpt  Christus, ist  us 
dem  worts  gots  geboren;  im  sel(cid:173)
ben  blibt  si, und  hört  nit  die 
stimme  eines  frömden. 

2.  Die  Kilch  Christi  machet  nit 
gesatz  und  bott  on  gots  wort, 
deshalb  aller  menschen  Satzungen, 
so  man  nempt  der  kilchen  pot, 
uns  nit  witer  bindent,  dann  si  in 
gottlichem  wort  gegründet  und 
poten  sind. 

3.  Christus  ist  unser  einige  wys-
heit,  gerechtigkeit,  erlösung  und 
bezahlung  aller  weit  sünd;  deshalb 
ein  ander  verdienst  der  saligkeit 
und  gnugthun  für  die  sünd  be(cid:173)
kennen, ist  Christum  verleugnen. 

16.  Das  Christus  wäsenlich,  wie 
er  sitzt,  zu  der  gerächten  Gottes 
vatters,  oder  amm  stammen  des 
erüzes  gehanget  ist, im  brot  der 
Dancksagung  sye, ist  ein  yrr-
thumm,  und  mag  mitt  heiliger  ge(cid:173)
sohrifft  nitt  bewisen  werden. 

14.  Die  Maß, damitt  man  Chri-
stumm  Gott  dem  vatter,  für  die 
Sünd  der  labenden  und  todten 
uffoppfferet,  ist  der  heiligen  ge(cid:173)
schrifft  wider,  und  dem  aller 
heiligisten  lyden  Christi,  einleste-
rung. 

574 

1.  Der  war  fronlichnam 
Christi  unnd  sin  blut  ist 
gegenwertig  im  sacrament 
des  alltars. 

4.  Das  der  lyb  und  das  blut 
Christi, wäsenlich  und  liplich  in 
dem  brot  der  dancksagung  emp(cid:173)
fangen  werd,  mag  mit  Biblischer 
geschrifft  nit  bybracht  werden. 

2.  Die  werden  ouch  war(cid:173)
lich  uffgeopfert  im  ampt 
der  meß  für  lebendig  und 
todten. 

5.  Die Maß,  yetz  im  bruch,  darinn 
man  Christum,  Gott  dem  vatter, 
für  die  sünd  der  lebendigen  und 
todten,  uffopffere,  ist  der  geschrifft 
widrig:  dem  aller  heyligosten 
opffer,  lyden  und  sterben  Christi, 
ein  lesterung,  und  umb  der  miß-
brüohen  willen, ein  grüwel  vor 
Gott! 

3.  Maria  und  die  heiigen 
sind  anzurieffen  als  für(cid:173)
bitter. 

12.  Diser  obrister  priester,  ist 
unser  einiger  mittler,  zwüschen 
Gott  dem  vatter,  und  uns  sinen 
glöubigen.  Deßhalben  all  andere 
mittler  und  fursprachen,  ussert 
diser  zyt,  von  uns, one  grund 
heyliger  geschrifft,  uff  geworffen 
sind. 

5.  Nach  dissem  leben  ist 
ein  fegfür. 

7.  Bilder  machen  zur  vereerung, 
ist  wider  Gottes  Wort  Nüws  und 
allts  testaments. 

4.  Des  herren  Jhesu  unnd 
des  heiigen  billdnuß  sinnd 
nit  abzethun. 

6. Wie  Christus  ist  alleyn  für  uns 
gestorben,  also  sol  er  ein  eyniger 
mitler  und  fürsprach  zwüschent 
Gott  dem  vatter,  und  uns  glöu(cid:173)
bigen,  angerüfft  werden.  Deßhalb 
all  ander  mittler  und  fursprachen 
usserthalf  disem  zyt  angeruffen, 
von  uns  on  grund  der  gschrifft, 
uffgeworffen. 

7.  Das  nach  disem  zyt  kein  Päg-
f hür  in  der  gschrifft  erfunden  wirt. 
Deßhalb  all  todten  dienst... ver(cid:173)
geblich  sind. 

8.  Bilder  machen  zur  vereerung, 
ist  wider  Gottes  wort,  Nüws  und 
Alts  Testaments.  Deßhalb  wo  sy 
in  gefar  der  vererung  fürgestellt, 
abzethtind  syend. 

Basel  Theses:  Pebruary  1524 

1.  Die  heilig  Ee  ist  keinem  Stand 
in  der  heiligen  geschrifft  ver-
botten. 

2.  Unküyscheit  usserthalb  der  Ee 
und  Hury  zu  vermyden  ist  die  Ee 
allen  Standen  verbotten. 

4.  Sömlich  unküyscheit  und 
Huory  ist  in  keinem  Stand  (der 
Ergernus  halb)  schädlicher,  dann 
in  dem  priesterlichen. 

5.  Ein  öffentlicher  huorer  ist  nach 
dem  göttlichen  gesatzt,  in  dem 
rächten  und  waren  bann,  und 
deßhalben  untougenlich  zuo  dem 
priesterlichen  ampt. 

9.  Die  heilig  ee  ist  keinem  stand 
verpoten  in  der  gschrift,  sonder 
hury  und  unkuschheit  ze  vermi-
den  allen  stenden  poten. 

10.  Diewil  ein  öffentlicher  hurer 
nach  der  gschrift  im  waren  bann, 
so  volget,  daß  unkuschkeit  und 
hury,  der  ergernuß  halb,  keinem 
stand  schädlicher  dann  priester(cid:173)
lichem. 

Pastor  Dr.  Dan  L.  Hendrioks,  Bowling  Green,  Kentucky  42102  (USA) 

575 

