ISSN 0254–4407 – Zwingliana 43 (2016), 177–192

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

How Heinrich Bullinger Resists the
Expectations of Confessionalization

Jon Delmas Wood

Introduction

Diplomacy characterizes much of Bullinger’s career. Examples ab-
ound. Scholars commonly note how Bullinger’s calming canniness
was especially apposite for leadership in just such a context. Pre-
carious circumstances following Zwingli’s demise had lately forced
the Zurich magistracy to impose new regulations upon clerical
function.1 Leo Jud – Bullinger’s fellow minister and Zwingli’s erst-
while close associate – feared a loss of church integrity. Following
Bullinger’s initial appeal to calm, Jud wrote a fervent retort. He
argued that human authority must not trump the unambiguous
authority of Scripture; and caution must never mitigate the Chris-
tian’s unflinching pursuit of perfection.2 The letter suggests a dog-
matic (perhaps even apocalyptic) urgency that may go hand in
glove with potentially Anabaptist concepts of church-state sepa-
ration. In any case, it does seem that injudicious zeal at such a

1 Bullinger himself was well aware of the political issues involved. He transcribed
copies of the new regulations of the inner-Zurich “Meilen Agreement” and inner-Swiss
“Second Peace of Kappel.” See: Heinrich Bullingers Reformationsgeschichte, ed. J. J.
Hottinger and H. H. Vögeli, vol. 3, Frauenfeld 1840, 247–253 and 284–291.

2 Heinrich Bullinger Briefwechsel, vol. 2: Briefe des Jahres 1532, ed. Ulrich Gäbler

et al., Zurich 1982, letter 75.

178

Jon Delmas Wood

moment in 1532 could well have run the Zwinglian church
aground. Bullinger’s success in allaying Jud’s distress is a trium-
phant testimony of the steady hand of Zwingli’s successor.

While not minimizing Bullinger’s genuinely diplomatic leaders-
hip qualities, I want to argue that there is much more to observe
here. A rather flexible or “prudent” approach to ministry was not
just a character trait of institutional realism. Bullinger systemati-
cally appropriated the humanist rhetorical agenda and adapted it
to a new vision for church integrity in coordination with the state.

The Complications of Reviving “Priesthood”

Huldrych Zwingli and his colleagues (erstwhile priests themselves)
went about demolishing traditional priesthood. The spiritual estate
with its essentially separate “indelible character” actually did, so
to speak, get “erased” in Zurich. The evangelical agenda stipulated
that all baptized persons must be construed to share in a common
priesthood. Zwingli made the point quite dramatically when he
likened the traditional notion of indelible character to the apoca-
lyptic “mark of the beast.”3 Nevertheless, it was a matter of ur-
gency for Zurichers to defend some institutional subset of minis-
try.4 Democratizing priesthood came with the horrifying potential
for atomizing the church, maybe even disintegrating society alto-
gether.

Zwingli formed a distinctively Reformed answer to this threat
when he recast church ministers now as “prophets” rather than
“priests.” The prophetic emphasis of his agenda is clear in count-
less ways. One may note, for example, the fact that the first Re-

3 See especially Zwingli’s comments on article 61 in “Ußlegen und gründ der
schlußreden oder articklen durch Huldrychen Zuingli, Zürich uff den 29. tag jenners im
1523. jar ußgangen,” in: Huldreich Zwinglis sämtliche Werke [Z], vol. 2, Leipzig 1908,
440.

4 This urgency was clearly understood already at the earliest expressions of the
principle of “priesthood of all the baptized.” Luther, for example, hastened to defend
institutional ministry at the same moment that he challenged the concept of a “spiritual
estate” in his 1520 Address to the German Nobility. The concern to secure a clerical
corps of evangelical leadership was in no wise a sudden, surprising realization after (and
still less a mere backlash against) the peasant uprisings of 1525.

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

179

formed Bible printed in Zurich (1529) was actually a collection of
Old Testament books of the prophets. The hallmark of prophecy
was exegetical expertise, deploying the humanist’s emphasis on
arts of language. Knowledge of Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and ver-
nacular German allowed for informed interpretation of Scripture –
in this way, communicating God’s words to the community. This
re-worked concept of “prophecy” re-secured the institutional
corps of ministry from disintegrative possibilities implicit in de-
mocratized priesthood; it also crystallized a Reformed identity
over against competing, Anabaptist notions of Christian commu-
nity, wherein prophecy was associated with charismatic empower-
ment to predict the future.

Following Zwingli, Bullinger continued to be sensitive to Ana-
baptist counter-claims.5 Certain Anabaptists argued that intellec-
tualist ministry (i.e., prophet as professional exegete) amounts to a
new guise for the same old problem of a clerical caste. Bullinger
believed that the way forward involved addressing pastoral au-
thentication. Specifically, the root problem of any errant concept
of ministry lay in self-authentication. The old spiritual estate was
fallacious, in his mind, precisely because of their proprietary un-
derstanding of indelible character radiating from the priesthood of
the bishop of Rome. Reformed clerical identity must be more cle-
arly differentiated from any hint of self-authentication in order to
refute the Anabaptist opposition to Zwinglian “prophecy.” To this
end, Bullinger increasingly characterized Reformed clergy not only
as prophetic, but also – in some modified ways, especially – as a
cohort of episcopacy/priesthood.

Bullinger’s concern to guard against the danger of self-authen-
tication meant that the “prophet” must not only be able to validate
divine authority by dint of exegetical fidelity to Scripture. The mi-
nister must also exercise a broader array of duties in and for the
community. Danie¨l Timmerman has argued that this lies at the
root of Bullinger’s transition toward increasingly priestly rhetoric
of ministry.6 Peter Opitz has also discussed Bullinger’s expansion

5 One may note, e.g., his 1531 defense of Reformed clerical identity over against

Anabaptist objections in Von dem unverschampten fraefel.

6 Danie¨l Timmerman, Heinrich Bullinger on Prophecy and the Prophetic Office

(1523–1538), Göttingen 2015 (Reformed Historical Theology 33), 151–155.

180

Jon Delmas Wood

of the concept of ministry beyond the Zwinglian hallmark of scho-
larly expertise to encompass a second focus of practical applicati-
on.7 Opitz acknowledges that Bullinger turned from rather uni-
form identification of ministers as “prophets” toward more epi-
scopal/priestly rhetoric, but Opitz also concludes that this is a dis-
tinction without much difference. I think there is rather more si-
gnificance to the transition than Opitz concedes. Bullinger elabo-
rated a view of Reformed priesthood – whether in its exegetical
expertise or in its broader, moral function – in order to secure the
Zurich clergy from any taint of self-referential, proprietary, self-
authentication.

The Significance of Reviving Priesthood

Ministry required a delicate balance of legitimation through ex-
egesis and application within the community; it also required au-
thentication by God’s rule of Christian society via magistracy. Un-
less the magistracy is, in fact, some sort of ‘other’ within a shared
Christian whole, ministry would fall prey to the equal and oppo-
site problems of Anabaptist Spiritualism and papal institutionalism
– namely, self-authentication. Bullinger’s turn toward more expli-
citly “priestly” rhetoric of ministry must be seen in continuity with
his efforts to mitigate potential pitfalls of the “prophetic” desi-
gnation in conjunction with clarification of church-state relations.
Gerard Roussel’s concept of an e´cole rhe´nane – a cultural reli-
gious zone from Zurich to Strasbourg – further helps illuminate
this trend.8 The Strasbourg reformer, Martin Bucer, notoriously
became a persona non grata (to put it mildly) in Zurich. Never-
theless, his influence may have been especially great in areas of
warning against Anabaptist tendencies toward apocalypticism un-

7 Peter Opitz, Von prophetischer Existenz zur Prophetie als Pädagogik: Zu Bullin-
gers Lehre vom munus propheticum, in: Heinrich Bullinger: Life – Thought – Influence,
ed. Emidio Campi and Peter Opitz, vol. 2, Zurich 2007 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Refor-
mationsgeschichte 24), 493–513.

8 See comments on this subject by Daniel Bollinger, Bullinger on Church Authority:
The Transformation of the Prophetic Role in Christian Ministry, in: Architect of Re-
formation: An Introduction to Heinrich Bullinger, 1504–1575, ed. Bruce Gordon and
Emidio Campi, Grand Rapids, MI 2004, 168.

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

181

leashed by the concept of prophecy. Bucer quickly and clearly re-
legated the office of “prophet” – incidentally, here associated more
with predictive than exegetical expertise – to the distant, unrepe-
atable past.9 Bullinger would never go quite that far, inasmuch as
he always insisted on an exegetical function of prophecy, but it is
striking that his writings follow a similar trajectory. The Second
Helvetic Confession asserts that prophets were extraordinary spo-
kesmen of the past, and that “even today (etiam hodie)” some
people of this sort may yet be found.10 This is worlds apart from
Zwingli’s (or even young Bullinger’s) enthusiastic identification of
all ministers as prophets.

Conveniently, there are good semantic grounds for a transition
between biblical concepts of “priest” (in conjunction with episco-
pacy) and “prophet.” Zwingli had already noted the connection
between the prophet as “seer” and the bishop as “over-seer.”11 If
the entire notion of episcopacy could thereby be considered as
prophetic, there is no necessary reason why Bullinger would find it
conceptually impossible to reverse the equation – that is, to re-
emphasize what is specifically “priestly” about an office once tou-
ted for its “prophetic” function. Bullinger softened the potentially
awkward transition by commenting upon the essential equality
between prophecy and priesthood within rightly exercised ministry
of the word.12 Negatively underscoring this same priest/prophet
identity is the fact that whenever Bullinger refers to antichristian
ministry in, say, the Sermones Synodales, the “ministers of Baal”
are sometimes called “prophets” and sometimes “priests.”13

Once the Council of Trent had got underway, Bullinger found it
necessary yet again to defend institutional ministry from any sense
of self-authentication. The impetus shifted from confronting Ana-
baptist counter-claims back toward defense of Reformed ministry

9 Martin Bucer, Von der waren Seelsorge, Strasbourg: Rihel, 1538, 13r.
10 Confessio Helvetica posterior, article 18. See, e.g., Reformierte Bekenntnisschrif-
ten [RB], vol. 2/2: 1562–1569, ed. Miha´ly Bucsay et al., Neukirchen-Vluyn 2009, 318.

11 Huldrych Zwingli, Von dem predigamt, in Z 4, 394–398.
12 Heinrich Bullinger: De scripturae sanctae authoritate deque episcoporum institu-
tione et functione (1538), ed. Emidio Campi and Philipp Wälchli, Zurich 2009 (Hein-
rich Bullinger Theologische Schriften 4) [HBTS 4], 106–109 (i.e., Book 2, chapter 1).
13 Cf. Sermones Synodales entries for May 1559 and October 1568. Zurich Zen-

tralbibliothek, Ms. D 220.

182

Jon Delmas Wood

against resurgent Catholicism. Bullinger noted that the papal cler-
gy highlighted their institutional credibility in terms of apostolic
succession derived from a papal “highpriest.” Bullinger utilized the
Zwinglian tradition of juxtaposing (true) Old Testament prophets
with (corrupt, if institutionally valid) Old Testament priests. And
yet: unlike Zwingli’s contrast of Catholic priesthood versus Refor-
med prophethood, Bullinger identified ministry – whether in terms
of Old Testament prophets or any true minister of any time – with
the specific priesthood of Melchisedek whose authority derives
from the unique high-priesthood of Christ.14 Why would the old
Zwinglian notion of minister-as-prophet have not sufficed in po-
lemic against Trent? – unless, indeed, Bullinger had developed a
vested interest in some Reformed concept of institutional “priest-
hood.”

Caveats to Bullinger’s Concept of Reformed Priesthood

When addressing Bullinger’s nascent “priestly” preference for Zu-
rich ministry, one must keep certain things firmly in mind. Most
importantly, the concept of indelible character remained an object
of Protestant loathing. The commencement of Trent merely rein-
forced Bullinger’s conviction on this point. Bullinger sought to dif-
ferentiate Reformed ministry from the papal institution which re-
lied upon indelible character of its priests channeled through
“apostolic succession” of the Roman pope. Bullinger systematical-
ly eschewed anything approximating a proprietary claim on cleri-
cal validity. In precisely this light, the Second Helvetic Confession
unambiguously reaffirms the shared priesthood of all believers,
and it even avers that “we do not give the name of priest to any
minister.” Someone could be excused for reading this and dispu-
ting any “priestly” turn in Bullinger’s view of Reformed ministry.
To understand how the Second Helvetic Confession is never-
theless consistent with a new idea of ministerial priesthood, one

14 Heinrich Bullinger: Sermonum decades quinque de potissimis Christianae religi-
onis capitibus (1552), 2 vols, ed. Peter Opitz, Zurich 2008 (Heinrich Bullinger Theo-
logische Schriften 3/1–2) [HBTS 3/1–2], 756 (Decas quinta, sermo I), cf. also 729 (De-
cas quinta, epistola dedicatoria).

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

183

must carefully observe Bullinger’s telling qualifications within this
notorious 18th article. The notion of priesthood of all believers
does not obviate an institutional ministry, and the odiousness of
the designation of “priest” for any minister lies, specifically, in the
ways in which it could be perceived to derive from a (papal) sa-
cramental prerogative. Bullinger is here opposing any sense of
priesthood that would purport to validate itself on any basis other
than the unique high-priesthood of Christ alone.15 In other words,
it seems that Bullinger was more concerned to avoid any sacra-
mental/sacrificial implications of a self-authenticated ministry than
he was to reject “priesthood” per se – be it priesthood of all the
believers or even, in some guarded sense, the priesthood of an
institutional ministry. Bullinger consistently considered the only
priest to be Christ, through whom all Christians together partici-
pate in priesthood. Vocational ministry is a particular manifesta-
tion of this one priesthood which functions for the community and
whose validity cannot be construed as proprietary.

Ministry is, for Bullinger, a particular service ‘set apart’ and
‘devoted to God,’ and it is positively necessary for the benefit of
society. Already in his 1538 Institution of Episcopacy, Bullinger
unambiguously asserts that God has always – not just in the Old
Testament era or since the New Testament, but always – organized
human communities by means of the two principles of civil and
priestly function.16 Priesthood is systematically fundamental, bey-
ond even the scope of historical Judaism or present Christianity.
Both in his 1538 treatise dedicated to King Henry VIII and in his
semi-annual sermons before the gathered clergy of Zurich, Bullin-
ger explicitly refers to ancient Persian, Egyptian, and Indian socie-
ties as good examples of this proper organization of society––even
though he makes no soteriological claim beyond Christianity.17
“Kingship” thus represents rather broadly all legitimate civil au-
thority, deriving from the unique kingship of Christ. This exten-
sion of kingship evidently includes Zurich’s republican councils.
“Levites” analogously represent all sacred ministry, including the

15 Confessio Helvetica posterior, article 18. See, e.g., RB 2/2, 319.
16 HBTS 4, 113–115 (i.e., Book 2, chapter 3).
17 Cf. Sermones Synodales entry for October 1556 and HBTS 4, 117 (i.e., Book 2,

chapter 4).

184

Jon Delmas Wood

Reformed clergy of Zurich. The integrity of each relies on the ot-
her, and both are obliged to serve the collective good. This remains
fully compatible with Bullinger’s efforts to preclude proprietary,
self-authentication. The magistracy is a necessary “other” to the
priestly ministry, and vice versa. Furthermore, both have no in-
trinsic authority apart from the unique King-Priesthood of Christ.
With care as to caveats, it even seems appropriate to speak of
Bullinger’s attempt to re-sacralize the clergy.18

Variety of Expressions for the Two Foci

of Reformed Priesthood

The Zurich synod supplied Bullinger with an ideal setting for cla-
rifying Zurich’s clerical institution. From his notes for these semi-
annual sessions, one notices his ideal of ministry conceived as a
composite of Matthew 24:45–51 and Malachi 2:1–9. The fact that
this occurs as an elaboration of doctrina et vita itself conforms to
the pattern (discussed by Opitz and others) of Bullinger’s develop-
ment of twin foci of ministry – namely, exegesis and application.
The “faithful and prudent servant” in Matthew easily corresponds
with these two foci. This Matthew passage clearly applies in its
context to all the faithful, and yet Bullinger applies it particularly
to the clergy through the lens of Malachi’s discourse on God’s
“covenant with Levi” (i.e., priesthood). Rhetoric involving terms
such as covenant and priesthood fundamentally concerns Christ
and therefore encompasses the entire baptized community; Bullin-
ger, however, employs such terms for his uniquely clerical audi-
ence. The Malachi-Matthew composite allowed Bullinger to high-

18 I largely agree with the sacralizing thesis argued by Pamela Biel, Doorkeepers at
the House of Righteousness: Heinrich Bullinger and the Zurich Clergy 1535–1575,
Bern 1991 (Zürcher Beiträge zur Reformationsgeschichte 15). To my mind, the preva-
lence of priestly models throughout the manuscripts of Sermones Synodales and formal
publications such as the 1538 Institution of Episcopacy supply just some of the cor-
roborating evidence. I appreciate the careful work of Danie¨l Timmerman regarding the
specific developments of Bullinger’s views regarding prophethood and priesthood, but I
do not agree with his dismissal of Biel’s basic argument of re-sacralized clergy. Cf.
Timmerman, Heinrich Bullinger on Prophecy, 28–29.

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

185

light the particular, clerical corps in Zurich before God and for the
people.

The eschatological aspect is crucial. Like other concepts discus-
sed above, eschatology is fundamentally about Christ, and as such
it pertains to the entire community of all the baptized. Bullinger
would never dispute that, and yet he also assigns special relevance
of eschatology to clerical identity. In the Matthew passage, the
Lord finally returns whereupon the drunken servant is cut to pieces
and cast out. In Malachi, the Levitical priest in breach of covenant
is told at last that he “will be put out of God’s presence.” The
eschatological key appears in many other contexts as well. One
may look, for example, to Bullinger’s 1557 Basel publication of De
fine seculi. Here again Bullinger remarks that hastening signs of
End Times are more and more fulfilled whenever criteria of clerical
faithfulness and prudence are violated – that is, the same escha-
tological attributes of ministry employed throughout his Sermones
Synodales.19 In his much more influential and widespread publi-
cation of The Decades, Bullinger similarly refers to the importance
of establishing proper ministry for the “public weal” in a time
otherwise noted for hastening Judgment.20 Out of this eschatolo-
gical matrix, the first sermon of the fifth Decade itself goes on to
establish a pattern of analogous paired hallmarks of Christian
priesthood: administering Word and Sacrament; faith and love;
doctrine and reverence.

Eschatologized Humanism and the Reformed Priesthood

Erasmus had highlighted much the same two categories of ministry
in his own 1535/36 handbook for priests (Ecclesiastes). He added
great weight to this discussion by personally asserting that he con-

19 Heinrich Bullinger, De fine seculi et iudicio venturo Domini nostri Iesu Christi,
deque periculis nostri huius seculi corruptissimi gravissimis, et qua ratione fiant innoxia
piis, Orationes duae, habitae in coetu cleri, per Heinrychum Bullingerum, Basel: Johan-
nes Oporin, 1557, 11.

20 Decas quinta, epistola dedicatoria, in: HBTS 3/2, 739. Of course, the eschatolo-
gical hue is ever present, if sometimes implicit, in many of Bullinger’s public and private
writings already in the ways in which Bullinger elaborated on priestly “vigilance” as a
corollary of the very term episcopus (or, “over-seer”).

186

Jon Delmas Wood

sidered this work to be the most painstaking and important of his
entire career.21 He consistently expounds on the need for a priest to
comport with the model of the faithful, prudent servant of Mat-
thew 24. He also connects this image to Christ’s words of Mat-
thew 10, whereby the disciples are sent out and told to be at once
“simple” as doves and “prudent” as serpents. Prudence, of course,
is precisely the complex, relational, contextual – even, canny – side
of ministry. “Prudentiae partes sunt, ex temporum, locorum ac
personarum circumstantiis dispicere, quid, quibus, quando, qua
moderatione sit adhibendum.”22

Bullinger, for his part, refers quite often and warmly to Eras-
mus’ Ecclesiastes throughout his 1538 Institution of Episcopacy.
Erasmus and Bullinger share the emphatic argument that a priest
must bear always in mind the two aspects of prudence and faith-
fulness a` la Matthew 24. There is a striking harmony between both
men on the subject of the two main aspects of authentic “priest-
hood.” Bullinger’s rubric of doctrina throughout his synodal me-
moranda corresponds with the term “prudence” of Matthew 24.
Doctrina (as “prudence”) encompasses exegetical teaching, as well
as correction of sins (by contextual, rhetorical power, not by for-
ce), catechism, sacraments, and care of poor and sick. Vita, then,
corresponds with “faithfulness,” and it usually includes keywords
of consistent integrity, holy lifestyle, disciplined study, and unwa-
vering words and deeds.23

Susanna Hausamman overstated in some respects the systematic
influence of Quintilian on Bullinger; nevertheless, her point in fa-
vor of Bullinger’s essential humanism remains valid.24 Instead of
the threefold task of the orator described by Quintilian (docere,

21 Frederick J. McGinness, Introductory Note, in: Collected Works of Erasmus, vol.

67: Spiritualia and Pastoralia: Exomologesis and Ecclesiastes 1, Toronto 2015, 82.

22 Opera Omnia Desiderii Erasmi, vol. V–4, Leiden 1991, 64.
23 The occasional inclusion of sacraments within Doctrina should cause caution in
assuming too close an identification between pairings of doctrina-vita on the one hand
and Word-Sacrament on the other. In a complete parallel, one could expect the element
of sacrament to be included under the heading of Vita. Nevertheless, Bullinger himself
does leave some wiggle room in this matter, inasmuch as the synodal charts of doctrina-
vita sometimes include “sacraments” in a middle space between the two – as if minis-
terial duties of sacraments could be construed in some respects as indeed part of doc-
trina and in other respects as vita.

24 Cf. Timmerman, Heinrich Bullinger on Prophecy, 154.

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

187

delectare, movere), it is the twofold office of priestly ministry ar-
ticulated by Erasmus and also by Bullinger that seems most fun-
damental. These two categories correspond in turn to the humanist
rhetorical principles of aptum and ethos. I take my clue in this
matter from the work of Erika Rummel, who has presented a con-
venient demonstration of both terms’ technical standing among
humanists.25 The term ethos served humanists as a way to indicate
any speaker’s due diligence in moral consideration of the “worth”
of speaker and of audience. The adept speaker should be vigilant
of his own moral standing while also supporting the moral stan-
ding of his audience. This overlaps with Bullinger’s emphasis on
holy lifestyle of faithfulness in the category of Vita. The other
word of the pair – aptum – involves humanist considerations of
contextuality, or,
indeed, “prudence.” Prudence as a technical
term of humanistic rhetoric implies nuance and appropriateness,
whereby a speaker does not say everything, in the same way, to
everyone, but instead wisely communicates by considering audi-
ence and setting. This concept of prudence appears to function
much the same as Bullinger’s episcopal heading of doctrina. So,
again, we have a nexus of synonymous terms constituting an over-
all set of pairs: prudence, aptum, and doctrina on the one hand
and faithfulness, ethos, and vita on the other.26

The humanist legacy of prudence/aptum constitutes more than a
superficial parallel to Bullinger’s thinking on the clerical office. It is
systematically important. That fact helps explain some of the ways
in which the concept of Reformed “priesthood” became important
for Bullinger – indeed, for Bullinger in ways that were not true of
many of his contemporaries. Bullinger would have been quite fa-
miliar with how prudence rendered humanists liable to various
accusations of protean inconsistency in matters of church teaching.
Vociferous commentators of various theological leanings left no
ambiguity in their perception of humanistic “prudence” as a dan-
gerous character flaw. Ulrich von Hutten rebuked anyone for at-

25 Erika Rummel, The Confessionalization of Humanism in Reformation Germany,

Oxford 2000, 121ff.

26 The technical connotations of ethos may well present the weakest connection to
Bullinger, inasmuch as he does not quite replicate the full humanist implications of
“civility,” or, the speaker’s task of accounting for the “worth” of his interlocutors.

188

Jon Delmas Wood

tempting to sidestep the stark light/dark alternatives of his apo-
calypticism; Otto Brunfels criticized temporizers; and Johannes
Fabri, the bishop of Vienna, upbraided the moderate overtures of
Bishop Jacopo Sadoleto. I scarcely need to add Calvin’s vehement
opposition to disembling “nicodemites,” or Luther’s dismissal of
Erasmus as an ever-shifting skeptic. But for Bullinger, the humanist
function of prudence served his purpose excellently in redefining
Reformed priesthood. Contextual flexibility precluded proprietary
(even, self-authenticating) standing of the clerical class.27 Throug-
hout his synodal elaborations on doctrina (informed as they are by
the model of the “prudent servant” of Matthew 24), Bullinger
reiterates the rhetorical principle of communicating as appropriate
to context.28 Rhetorical rigidity (even, dogmatism) would amount
to an assertion of group identity defined by itself rather than by its
relationships.

It is already noteworthy that Bullinger positively embraced this
contested legacy of humanism. That he further yoked nimble dis-
course to End-Times rhetoric is perhaps truly unique in the Refor-
mation. Humanists had reacted with allergic aversion to apocalyp-
ticism. Bullinger distilled a remedy out of eschatology itself. His
references to “timeliness” include the typical humanistic notions of
contextuality, yet they invariably also connote vigilance as to the
Lord’s imminent return. Zurich ministry has its distinctly sacred
profile as a kind of “priesthood” in light of its unique vocation to
speak beyond itself, moored to an eschatological reality.

This again presupposes a special relationship with civil autho-
rity, who, for their part, similarly “participate” in the eschatolo-
gical kingship of Christ. Without the tandem of kingship and
priesthood, the rhetorical power of clerical “prudence” would not
function properly. All disciplinary coercive power belongs to the
Christian magistracy alone. Neither civil nor clerical function can
subsume the other, because both operate in a relationship with one
another for the community; their spiritual validity is non-proprie-

27 Erasmus had lampooned theological dogmatism in his infamous Praise of Folly,
where Folly herself once admonishes that ‘there is nothing so imprudent as misplaced
wisdom.’

28 There are numerous variations on: “Applicanda semper et recte secanda pro per-

sonis loco et tempore.”

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

189

tary. Bullinger has transformed a humanist agenda through an es-
chatological lens for the purpose of clarifying priestly identity in a
Reformed state.

Conclusion: Clergy, Confessionalization,
and a Reprise of the Exchange with Jud

All of the above leads to some interesting upshots for confessio-
nalization. It is a contested thesis in certain respects, but most
historians broadly agree with the view that political jurisdictions
did increasingly effectively regulate religious mechanisms of social
discipline and clerical bureaucratization.29 Scholars who have com-
mented upon Bullinger’s development of ministry from a prophetic
model toward a more episcopal or even priestly model have tended
to view this as evidence of something along these lines. Daniel
Bolliger, for example, has noted rather starkly that “the ministers
were institutionalised communally and became officials of the sta-
te.”30 And yet, to say so amounts to conceding validity to Jud’s
frantic objections back in 1532. It also seems unlikely that so
strong an objection could have been – as all accounts indicate – so
readily resolved in Jud’s mind if Bullinger’s developing view of
ministry had amounted to statist officialdom.

In order to understand the nuance of Bullinger’s exchange with
Jud, one must note the ways in which he fully recognized: a) le-
gitimate concerns in Jud’s objections, and b) the problematics im-
plicit in Jud’s own, initial vote for church-state separation. As to
the former, Bullinger agreed that the church must indeed retain its
unique sacredness. This is precisely the point of his insistence on
the concept of Christ’s high-priesthood. The state functions
alongside the church in order to authenticate the conferral of this
status, lest the ministry be self-authenticated in the ways Bullinger

29 I share Ute Lotz-Heumann’s view that so long as one avoids overestimating its
explanatory capacity, confessionalization still helps illuminate macro-historical trends.
Ute Lotz-Heumann, Confessionalization, in: The Ashgate Research Companion to the
Counter-Reformation, ed. Alexandra Bamji, Geert H. Janssen, and Mary Laven, Farn-
ham 2013, 33–53. Pages 40–42 are especially relevant to the notion of modified ap-
plicability of the confessionalization thesis.

30 Bolliger, Bullinger on Church Authority, 176.

190

Jon Delmas Wood

deplored among both Anabaptists and Catholics. Even so, the sa-
credness of ministry is not strictly the state’s possession to confer.
Bullinger could therefore demonstrate some agreement with Jud. I
think it is even more interesting, however, to note how Bullinger
perceived the pitfalls implicit in Jud’s own propositions. It appears
that Bullinger anticipated the less obvious ways in which Jud was
contributing to what historians would later come to associate with
confessionalization. This is ironic because Jud was, after all, ar-
guing for more robust church-state separation; confessionalization
notoriously implies increasing domestication of church within the
state. Jud’s connection to confessionalization turns up in his un-
witting complicity in the confessionalized trend toward theological
“purity,” or, dogmatism.

Erika Rummel has presented the story of confessionalization as a
tragic denouement. Renaissance humanists’
initial approach of
“prudence” had posed a systematic critique of what they perceived
as arrogance and inflexibility of “schoolmen” – that is, the theo-
logical professionals. The process of confessionalization turned
that critique into the polemics of new partisans. Polemicists co-
opted the language-skills of humanism and pressed them to service
in an increasingly dogmatized agenda of various (Protestant or
Catholic) state-churches. Confessionalization invariably involved
flattening, or ossifying, of erstwhile rhetorical nuance. Humanism
thus became, pitifully, the very monster from whose grip early
humanists had sought to liberate Christendom.31 In 1532, Jud was
not arguing for a state-church, but he was arguing for just the sort
of dogmatic intransigence that states inevitably required for the
domestication of their clergy in line with shibboleths of their own
religious polity.32

31 Rummel, Confessionalization of Humanism, passim, esp. 150–152.
32 The case of Geneva is instructive. Under Calvin, Geneva developed a system of
church-state distinction that seems to have met many of Jud’s own 1532 preferences. It
also became notorious – again, owing much to Calvin’s leadership – for its increasing
theological inflexibility. The opposition to dissembling “Nicodemites” is illustrative of
a broader emphasis on doctrinal rigor. Calvin’s efforts to distinguish church and state
notwithstanding, the church noted for its theological precision – or, its decontextualized
hardening of propositional truth – fairly quickly fell under the unambiguous control of
the state shortly after Calvin’s death. On this transition, see: Scott Manetsch, Calvin’s
Company of Pastors: Pastoral Care and the Emerging Reformed Church, 1536–1609,
Oxford 2013, 212–214.

Reconceiving the Clerical Corps

191

Bullinger stands especially indebted to humanism in the way in
which he retained “prudence” in his model of Zurich clergy. Yes,
Bullinger’s Reformed priesthood necessarily functioned with, and
in some senses under, the authority of magistracy. Bullinger con-
tributed to the overt confessionalizing agenda of the state in com-
posing uniform, state-supported theological statements. No one
could dispute Bullinger’s bona fides as a theologian with specifi-
cally Reformed doctrinal convictions. It is in this light that one
must see his emphasis on Vita (or, “faithfulness”) at synod ga-
therings – where Vita implied just the type of consistency involved
in uniform, confessional statements. On the other hand, it is equal-
ly true and necessary for him that the Reformed priestly office
must retain contextual flexibility. The sheer open-endedness of
“prudence” would be impossible for any state institution to ap-
propriate. Prudent ministers must dispense appropriate spiritual
food as fitted to various circumstances within an ongoing End-
Time. By securing the unique rhetorical persuasive power of a new
kind of priesthood, Bullinger meant to preserve the church’s own
integrity vis-a`-vis the disciplinary/coercive otherness of magistracy.
It appears that Bullinger recognized the threat of inflexible dog-
matism and systematically went about developing an institutional
priestly identity designed to mitigate this trend.33 This stands in
contrast to the thesis that clericalization for Bullinger played the
simple part of confessionalization. I think it may also help to cla-
rify just how it was that that Bullinger allayed Jud’s qualms of
1532.

Jon Delmas Wood, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, The George Washington University,
Washington, DC

Abstract: The traditional concept of priesthood aroused much interest and animosity in
the Reformation. Huldrych Zwingli led efforts to expand priesthood beyond a sacra-
mental subset of Christendom to encompass instead the sum of all the baptized. He
redefined clerical identity as a humanistic/linguistic corps of “prophets.” Heinrich Bul-

33 If so, this means that Bullinger anticipated many of the religious conflicts not only
between Catholic and Protestant jurisdictions, but also, and perhaps especially, among
various broadly denominated Protestants. I am especially reminded of Katharina Schütz
Zell’s poignant defense of integrity with flexibility. Against the party of Ludwig Rabus,
she asserted that dogmatism threatened an essential quality of the initial movement of
reform. See, for example: Katharina Schütz Zell: Church Mother. The Writings of a
Protestant Reformer in Sixteenth-Century Germany, ed. Elsie McKee, Chicago 2006.

192

Jon Delmas Wood

linger shared in Zwingli’s mission to preserve a ministerial corps, and yet he found it
increasingly necessary to modify the mold of “minister-as-prophet.” Bullinger carefully
re-appropriated some aspects of a “priestly” identity for the clerical corps. In the pro-
cess, he created a fruitful – perhaps even unique – hybrid of humanism with eschato-
logy. The upshot was a model for church-state relations that cannot be reduced to the
expectations of propositional dogmatism commonly associated with the theory of con-
fessionalization.

Keywords: clerical identity; Reformed priesthood; humanism; eschatology; dogmatism;
confessionalization; Heinrich Bullinger

