Women  in Zwingli's  World 

by  EDWARD J.  FURCHA 

Traditional  Zwingli  scholarship has been fairly  unanimous  in the assumption  that 
women  did  not play  a significant  role in Zwingli's  life.  The records  are  strangely 
silent  on  the  matter.  Neither  his  writings  nor  his  activities  suggest  that  Zwingli 
was greatly  involved  with  women  and  their  specific  concerns. In fact,  one  of  the 
archivists of the Zürich Staatsarchiv expressed  surprise some years ago when I as-
ked for catalogue entries under the subject heading «women in Zwingli's world». 

Nonetheless,  the  possibility  of  gaining  new  insights  into  the  role  women 
played  in  Zwingli's  world  led  us  to  re-examine  a  number  of  available  sources. 
Would they yield the desired Information  and reveal the reformer's  attitude toward 
women -  his wife, Anna Reinhart, his mother, his  sisters, his daughters  or  female 
acquaintances?  What  was  Zwingli's  relationship  with  women  in  his  capacity  as 
pastor and leader of ecclesiastical reforms  in Zürich between  1519 and  1531? 

Certain  rumours  seem to have persisted  among his contemporaries  that  in his 
youth, at least, Zwingli had an eye for  women and did not adhere to vows of celi-
bacy as strictly  as he might have. However, corroboration  for  these occasional al-
lusions has not been readily available. 

Some years ago, Edwin Künzli published  an article on «Der Mann bei Zwing(cid:173)
li»1 in which the author demonstrated  Zwingli's  appeal  to and his general  success 
in dealing with men. Was the reformer  equally  successful  with women? Could he 
offer  them spiritual counsel? How did women respond to him? 

Although  one  might  wish  to  speculate  on  his  success  with  women  as  priest 
and  pastor,  or  as  husband  and  father,  history  cannot  simply  be  rewritten  in  this 
fashion.  Zwingli  challenged  many  of  the  existing  socio-political  structures  and 
showed  great  sensitivity  in response to  some of the burning problems  of  the day. 
Yet,  one  cannot  confidently  deduce  from  this  general  Observation  what  might 
have been his attitude to women, since he seems to have said little on the matter. 

His  extant  correspondence  contains  no  more  than  seven  letters  addressed  to 
him  by  six  female  correspondents.  No  reply  from  the  reformer  to  any  of  these 
women has come down  to us, though  one of Zwingli's  letters of  22 April  1523 to 
Margareta  Fehr  of  Einsiedeln  has  survived  in  manuscript  form2.  It  is  quite  a re-
markable  letter  to a woman  who  appears  to have been  somewhat  of  a busy-body 
and  a  scold  and  may  have  suffered  from  depressions  over  the  State  of  things. 
Zwingli's tone is pastoral, yet pointed when he suggests that she might allow some 
of the tranquility  that comes from  being grounded  in Scripture to govern  her own 
«short»  life.  She would then show  forth  to others how much «calmer and  sounder 

1 
2 

Edwin Künzli, Der Mann bei Zwingli, in: Zwingliana XI/6, 1961/2, 351-371. 
ZVIII, no. 300, p. 71-73. 

131 

Christians are than unbelievers.» From Zwingli's comments to her we also learn of 
the  high  esteem  he had  of  marriage.  He  assures  Margareta  that  nothing  in Scrip-
ture prohibits  a married  priest  from  serving  communion  to his  wife  and  suggests 
to her that regret over envy, bitterness, quarrelsomeness  and anger would be more 
appropriate  than  worries  about  regulations  made  by  human  beings.  He  does  not 
omit, however,  to compliment  her  on her eagerness  to learn more  about  the  faith 
and  on  her  diligent  reading  (presumably  of  the  Scriptures  and  of  some  of  the 
booklets he had written). 

The  only  other  known  letter  from  Zwingli  addressed  to  a  woman,  is  a  short 

note to his wife Anna; it teils us little about Zwingli or Anna. 

Of the seven letters to Zwingli mentioned above, the earliest was from  Marga-
retha  von Wattenwyl,  dated  14 March  15233. A Joint  letter  from  Margaretha  and 
her  sister  Katherine  to Zwingli  was  written  probably  around  1524/254 when  both 
were still residents of a cloister of Claires  in Königsfelden.  At the time of writing 
the  formerly  strict  rule  of  the  cloister  had  been  relaxed  sufficiently  so  that  their 
convent  functioned  in pari as a tourist  home for  sisters on their way to becoming 
laicized.  Indeed, both  women  seemed  ready  themselves  to give up cloistered  life 
for  matrimony.  Margaretha  became  engaged  to  Lucius  Tscharner  of  Chur  while 
she was still in the cloister, probably as a result of Zwingli's mediation. In August 
of  1525, Tscharner declared to the Council of Berne his intention to marry her and 
by  31 March  1526 the couple was expecting  a child, as may be concluded  from  a 
thank-you  letter  to  Zwingli  in  which  Tscharner  asked  the  Zürich  pastor  to  find 
him  a mature woman who might manage the household  during Margaretha's  con-
finement.  He acknowledged his unfamiliarity  with kitchen duties5. 

Margaretha's  sister  Katherine  also  left  the  cloistered  life  to  marry  the  noble-
born Junker Jörg May of Berne. Theirs seems to have been a lengthy union; she is 
reported to have died in  1576 after  several years of widowhood. 

The third  female  correspondent  was  Barbara  Trüllerey,  abbess  of  the  cloister 
Schanis, near Glarus. Her letter is dated  24 February  15246. Barbara came from  a 
patrician family  of Schaffhausen  and Aarau  and was a cousin of Vadianus, the re-
former  of  St. Gallen. Zwingli might  have been acquainted  with her ever since his 
years  in  the  parish  of  Glarus,  though  we  know  nothing  specific  about  their 
relationship at that time. 

In  her  short  letter  she  urges  Zwingli  to provide  Spiritual  counsel  for  a young 
relative and she assures him that she would  secure every possible material help so 
that the boy might  grow  up to become  a solid Citizen. In passing, the abbess  asks 
Zwingli to give her an exposition of Matthew 20,16, «The last will be first  and the 

Z VIII, no. 289, p. 49f. 
Z VIII, no. 357, p. 284f. 

3 
4 
5  M. Thomann,  Vier Frauenbriefe  an Zwingli aus den Jahren  1523-26, ein Beitrag zur 
Charakteristik des Reformators, in: Neue Zürcher Zeitung, 1  January  1925, no. 1, 4, 8 
[abbr.: Thomann, Frauenbriefe]. Z VIII, no. 357, p. 284 n. 1. 
Z VIII, no. 328, p.  154f. 

6 

132 

first  will be last»,  and  of  22,14, «Many  are called,  but few  are  chosen».  She  im-
plores him  to pray  for  her that she might be affirmed  in the  «holy  gospel». In the 
epistolary  address  she refers  to Zwingli  as  «preacher  of  the holy  word  of  God  in 
the praiseworthy  city of Zürich». 

What  we  know  about  Barbara  Nithart,  the  fourth  correspondent,  is  based  al-
most  exclusively  on her  letter  of  13 September  15267. She  seems  to  have been a 
widow  at  the  time,  concerned  with  her  Student  son  who  was  in  need  of  money. 
Zwingli is asked to assure the son's continued diligence and application to studies, 
without  which  the  family  foundation  might  stop  supporting  the  young  man. 
Though her intended meaning is not always clear to the modern reader, the tone of 
the letter would suggest that Barbara Nithart was not too pleased with the prospect 
of  an  idle  nineteen-year  old  son.  Rather  than  encourage  idleness,  she  herseif 
would  withdraw  any  financial  Support  and  even  «disown»  her  son. How  Zwingli 
responded  to this rather  uncompromising  stance of  a concerned  mother,  and what 
he might have done to keep the young man on the straight and narrow path to be-
coming  educated  are not known. It would  seem, however,  that the  Student  turned 
out  all  right  since his name  appears  between  1538 and  1542 among  the members 
of the Lesser Council of Constance8. 

The short note by Zwingli to his wife  Anna Reinhart is dated Berne,  ) 1 Janu-
ary  15289. The letter is devoid  of any «private» matter. It contains no reference  to 
their  domestic  Situation.  The  few  words  of  comfort  expressed  in  the  letter  are 
rather  conventional  and  allow  for  no  conclusions  about  Zwingli's  relationship  to 
his  wife.  The  only  interesting  point  in  the  letter  is  Zwingli's  request  to  have  his 
work coat sent to him. 

Three of the extant letters from  female  correspondents  were written during the 
last  two  years  of  the  reformer's  life.  One  is  a  short  note  from  a Margaretha  Züst 
written  late in  1529 after  Zwingli's return  from  the Marburg  Colloquy10. The wri-
ter asks Zwingli  to  resume  oversight  of her  son and to  inform  her by  return mes(cid:173)
senger of how the boy  was faring.  Zwingli  seems to have known her through  one 
of her relatives, the school teacher Rellikan. 

Barbara  Thormann,  widow  of  the  prominent  Bernese  guild  master  John  von 
Weingarten, corresponded with Zwingli in the years  1530/31. Two of these letters 
have  survived11.  Much  of  what  we know  of  her belongs  to  the realm  of  probabi-
lity. Because  she was related, through her marriage, to Benedict of Weingarten of 
Aarberg, Canton Berne, who served as a member of the Great Council of Berne in 
1488 and whose brother Hans, Landvogt  of Erlach, was a committed  supporter of 

7 
8 
9 

ZVIII.no. 526, p. 711-713. 
Thomann, Frauenbriefe. 
Z IX, no. 682, p. 346f; no. 683, p. 349, n. 9. Cf.  also: Rudolf Steck,  Ursula Tremp, 
Zwingiis Base, in: Zwingliana IV/2, 1921/2, p. 46. 

10  ZX.no. 936, p. 340. 
11  ZXI, no. 1153, p. 291f;no. 1268, p. 597. 

133 

Zwingli,  the  latter  would  probably  have  known  her  and  her  sons12. Her  two  letters 
concern  themselves  with  the  well-being  of  her  step  son  (John  Steiger),  and  his 
slightly  younger  half-brother  George  von  Weingarten,  whom  the  mother  hopes  to 
be  able  to  apprentice,  and  to  place  in  boarding,  respectively.  The  second  letter  of 
30  August  1531,  suggests  that  the  arrangement  for  the  eider  of  the  two  was  suc-
cessfully  made,  while  the  second,  at  the  time  of  writing,  had  not  been  appropri-
ately  settled. 

Barbara  Thormann's  request  and  some  of  the  other  letters  we  referred  to  clear-
ly  suggest  that  Zwingli  extended  his  pastoral  concern  beyond  preaching,  fheologi-
cal  disputes  and  city  politics  to  such  mundane  matters  as  «acting  like  a  father»  to 
fatherless  boys.  While  such  tasks  placed  no  financial  stress  on  the  Zwingli  house-
hold,  they  required  time  and  probably  some  delicate  negotiations. 

Although  the  above  letters  offer  refreshing  insights  into  Zwingli's  concern  for 
very  mundane  matters,  they  give  few,  if  any,  clues  to  his  attitude  towards  women. 
Whether  his  wife  Anna  played  any  part  in  the  negotiations  and  «care»  of  the  boys 
commended  to his  care  is not  apparent  from  the extant  correspondence. 

Since  only  two  Zwingli  letters  to  women  have  survived,  we  cannot  comment 
on  how  much  of  the  appreciation  of  learned  women  he  shared  with  contemporary 
humanists.  While  theirs  was  a  highly  positive,  not  to  say  supportive,  attitude  to-
ward  noble-born  and  educated  women,  Zwingli's  extant  writings  reveal  little of  his 
personal  opinion  on  the  matter. 

In  fact,  apart  from  a  sermon  on  the  Blessed  Virgin  Mary  (17  September  1522) 
Zwingli  makes  few  comments  on  womankind.  And  this  sermon  cannot  serve  as  a 
gauge  of  his  views  on  women  since  it  was  obviously  intended  to  show  his  ortho-
doxy.  It  was  dedicated  to  his  brothers  in  Wildhaus  whose  own  orthodoxy  was 
being  questioned  because  of  Zwingli's  alleged  heresy.  In  the  sermon  he  sought  to 
dispel  any  doubt  about  his  devotion  to  Mary  by  asserting  that  her  specific  merit 
lay  in  the  fact  that  she  «gave  birth  to  the  redeemer  of  the  world».  He  leaves  no 
doubt  that no  greater  honour  can  be  given  her  than  «knowing  him  for  what  he  is». 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  other  sermonic  material  by  the  reformer  in  which 
Zwingli  touches  on  the  virtues  or  vices  of  women.  He  says  nothing  on  the  training 
of  young  girls  or  even  on  how  to  prepare  young  women  for  Christian  marriage. 
Would  he  have  written  a different  «Instruction  to  the  Young»  had  Anna  Reinhart's 
eldest  child  from  her  first  marriage  been  a  girl?  Zwingli  has  no  word  of  advice  to 
the  daughters  of  Anna's  first  marriage  nor  to  the  two  daughters  born  to  Anna  and 
himself. 

We  know,  of  course,  that  Zwingli  was  not  unaware  of  women.  He  took  an  ag(cid:173)
gressive  position  against  enforced  celibacy.  By  his  own  admission  he  found  it  dif-
ficult  to  live  without  maintaining  some  intimacy  with  a  woman,  though  we  know 
of  no  paternity  suit  against  him13.  However,  whether  he  concerned  himself  with 

12  Cf.  Die Berner-Chronik  des Valerius Anshelm, 6 vols., Bern  1884-1901, vol. 6, index: 

Weingarten. 

13  Cf. Zwingli's letter to Henry Utinger, 5 December  1518, in: Z VII, no. 48, p. 110-113. 

134 

women  beyond  the  traditional  «Kinder,  Kirche,  Küche»  as  devout  and  worthy 
helpmeets of men and as integral to God's created order of things, remains open to 
conjecture. He appears to have been comfortable  with prevalent notions regarding 
the respective role of men  and women  as long as these  appeared  firmly  grounded 
in Scripture and were underscored by good Patristic tradition. 

We may  assume then that he was motivated  to marry  Anna Reinhart -  the al-
legedly very attractive widow of Gerold Meyer von Knonau and daughter of a Zü(cid:173)
rich  innkeeper  and  his  wife  -  in order  to  realize  some  of  the  above  purposes  for 
men and women. When he «wedded» Anna «secretly» in early  1522, she had been 
widowed  for  about  five  years  and  was  the  mother  of  three  children.  The  public 
blessing  of  their  marriage  took  place  in  1524, shortly  before  their  first  child  was 
born. Four  children  in all were born to them  during  the seven  years of  their  mar(cid:173)
riage. Regula  (1524-64), the eldest, became the wife of Rudolph Gwalter,  minister 
at  St.  Peter's  and  antistes  of  the  Zürich  church  after  Bullinger's  death  (their 
daughter Anna, incidentally,  later married  Henry Bullinger, Jr.). Regula and Anna 
are immortalized  in a rather idyllic portrait by Hans Asper, painted  when the mo(cid:173)
ther was about twenty-five  and the daughter about seven. 

Few  Zwingli  biographers  have  touched  on  his  family  life.  Oskar Farner14  is 
one of the few.  He devotes  the entire  seventh  chapter to the subject.  Gottfried  W. 
Locher15,  the  doyen  of  contemporary  Zwingli  scholars,  on  the  other  hand,  does 
not discuss Zwingli's attitude to women. 

While undue preoccupation  with a topic of relative  insignificance  in Zwingli's 
own world could falsify  our assessment of the reformer,  it is possible that new in-
sights might be gained, and forgotten  sources reassessed,  in the attempt to see this 
familiär person in a new constellation. 

Our  reading  of  the  pertinent  material  allows  us  to  conclude  with  some  cer-
tainty  that  Zwingli  was  not  a feminist.  His  view  of  women  seemed  more  in  line 
with  traditional  views  than  with  those  of  some  of  the  humanists  of  his  day.  He 
echoed  St. Paul in stating that the «greatest adornment of a woman is the ability to 
keep silent»16 and he appeared  somewhat arbitrary  when he wrote that in Scripture 
prophecying means «listening to sermons»17. 

Though  he  denounced  enforced  celibacy  and  chose  marriage  for  himself,  he 
also  held  that  «if  we could  do without  wives,  we  would  avoid  great  pain»18. His 
"own ambivalence  is probably  most clearly  stated  in  a comment  on Mark  10: «To 
marry  a  woman  is dangerous  -  to remain  Single  is equally  dangerous»19.  On  the 

14  Oskar Farner, Huldrych Zwingli, der Schweizerische Reformator, Emmishofen 1917. 
15  Gottfried Wilhelm Locher, Huldrych Zwingli in neuer Sicht, zehn Beiträge zur Theolo(cid:173)

gie der Zürcher Reformation, Zürich 1969. 

16  ZIV 153. 
17  ZIV414f. 
18  ZV12;ZHI17f. 
19  Aus Zwingiis Predigten zu Matthäus, Markus und Johannes, ausgewählt und übers, von 
Oskar Farner, Zürich 1957, (Veröffentlichungen  der Rosa Ritter-Zweifel-Stiftung, Re(cid:173)
ligiöse Reihe), 294f. 

135 

other  hand,  Zwingli's  ideal  woman  would  be  «so  pleasant  in  nature  as  to  soften  a 
rough  man»20. 

To  round  out  the  picture  of  prevailing  attitudes  toward  women  in  Zwingli's 
world  we  will  now  turn  to  selected  sources  from  outside  the  confines  of  Zürich 
and  beyond  the  Reformers  own  writings  and  correspondence.  One  potential  mine 
of  information,  the  Vadian  Correspondence21  offers  few  clues.  Of  some  four 
hundred  and  ninety  letters,  only  nine  were  written  by  women,  most  of  them  on 
subjects  related  to  their  State  of  health  and  containing  comments  on  the  effecti-
veness  of  the  doctor's  prescribed  medical  treatments. 

Henry  Bullinger's  literary  legacy,  on  the  other  hand,  provides  richer  material 
on  the  topic22.  As  chief  minister  of  the  Zürich  church  after  the  death  of  Zwingli 
his  views  were  significant  in  shaping  the  early  stages  of  the  «reformed»  tradition. 
By  the  same  token,  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  his  ideas  reflect  many  of  the  prevalent 
views  of  his  day. 

Among  his  correspondence  with  women  is  an  exchange  of  letters  between  him 
and  his  future  wife,  Anna  Adlischweiler,  which  includes  his  proposal  of  marriage. 
In  1528  he  produced  a  treatise  on  the  morality  and  conduct  of  the  ideal  Christian 
woman.  Of  some  interest  also  is  Lucretia,  a kind  of  morality  play  which  he  wrote 
when  he  was  a  young  school  teacher,  between  1523  and  1528.  Finally,  three  ser-
mons  in  his  «Decades»  of  1550  bear  closer  scrutiny  in  this  context23.  The 
exchange  of  letters  between  Henry  and  Anna  began  when  the  former  was  a  Stu(cid:173)
dent  of  about  twenty-three  and  the  latter,  along  with  her  mother,  had  just  entered 
the  sister  house  at  Ötenbach  to  live  «dedicated  to  God».  Bullinger  obviously  at-
tempted  to  dissuade  the  young  woman  from  such  a  course  by  proposing  to  marry 
her.  He  tried  to convince  Anna  (without  harming  her  tender  conscience),  that  mar(cid:173)
riage  is  an  honorable  estate. Rather  soberly  he  listed  his  strengths  and  weaknesses, 
asking  her  to  do  the  same  in  return.  Unlike  many  of  his  contemporaries,  it  would 
seem,  Bullinger  could  Claim  to  have  maintained  a celibate  life  (despite  opportuni-

20  Z VIA 434. 
21 

Joachim  von Watt  (Vadianus), humanist, medical  doctor  and reformer  of the church in 
St.  Gallen,  was born  28  December  1481  and  died  6  April  1551. His  extensive  corre(cid:173)
spondence  is  edited:  Die  Vadianische  Briefsammlung  der  Stadtbibliothek  St.  Gallen, 
ed.  by  Emil  Arbenz  and  Hermann  Wartmann,  7  vols.,  St.  Gallen  1890-1913, 
(Mitteilungen  zur Vaterländischen Geschichte  14-30a). 

22  Among  the  many  works  on  Bullinger  ist  still  helpful:  Raget  Christoffel,  Heinrich 
Bullinger  und  seine  Gattin  nach  ihrem  segensreichen  Wirken  in  ihrer  Familie,  Ge(cid:173)
meinde  und  gegen  verfolgte  Glaubensgenossen,  Zürich  1875  [abbr.:  Christoffel, 
Bullinger].  Primary  Bullinger  material  is  being  published  since  1972  as  «Heinrich 
Bullinger Werke»; several volumes have appeared to date. 

23  Cf.  HBBW I, no. 24, p.  126-141; nos. 26-27, p.  145-176. Bullinger's  «Von  weiblicher 
Zucht  und  wie  eine  Tochter  ihr  Wesen  und  ihr  Leben  führen  soll»  was  published  by 
Christoffel,  Bullinger,  36-45. The «Decades»  published  in numerous  editions  in Latin, 
German,  English  and  French  enjoyed  great  popularity  in  England  during  the  reign  of 
Elizabeth  I. Cf.  HBBibl  I, nos.  179-227, p. 88-113. Note especially,  sermons  21-23 in 
the  1550 edition. 

136 

ties  to do otherwise).  He assures  Anna  that  his mind  is set on her alone. We  learn 
that  Bullinger  saw his intentions  as fully  justified  and as «willed  of  God». 

Regrettably,  Anna's  response  has  not  survived.  It  would  seem,  however,  that 
in her letters  to him she was less  inclined  to respond  favourably  to his earnest  plea 
than  she might  have  been  in  personal  encounters.  Obviously  under  pressure  from 
her  mother  and probably  from  her brother  who stood  to  lose  from  a marriage  bet-
ween  Anna  and  Henry,  she  turned  Henry  down.  Henry  was  not  to  be  dissuaded 
easily.  He  took  the matter  to  marriage  court  for  alleged  breach  of promise.  Persi-
stence  paid  off.  After  the death  of Anna's  mother,  the marriage  finally  took  place. 

If  the  number  of  children  born  to  Henry  and  Anna  is  any  indication,  theirs 
must  have  been  a  happy  marriage.  They  were  blessed  with  eleven  children.  Un-
fortunately,  we  know  little  of  this  remarkable  woman  other  than  the  fact  that  she 
was praised  as an ideal  pastor's  wife.  She is cited  for having  helped  to alleviate  the 
plight  of  numerous  refugees  who had  corne  to  Zürich  during  the  ministry  of  her 
husband.  In  addition,  she  took  an  active  part  in  caring  for  orphans,  a  task  which 
earned  her the endearing  title  «Zürimutter». 

As  Anna  Reinhart  before  her, so Anna  Adlischweiler,  too, did not receive  the 
limelight  treatment  which  wives  of  public  figures  are  given  in  our  day  and age. 
Hence,  their  feelings  and  sentiments  were  not  open  to  scrutiny  and their  relation-
ships  to their  husbands  not a matter  of public  record. 

Ambrosius  Blarer,  reformer  of the church  in Constance,  also  courted  by  corre-
spondence.  He  sought  to  win  the  favour  of  a  nun  by  sending  her,  among  other 
things,  a  «Christian  love  letter»  in  twenty-seven  stanzas24.  Unlike  Bullinger,  Bla(cid:173)
rer  was  in  his  early  forties  when  he  and  his  many  friends  considered  it  a  sign  of 
evangelical  prudence  to  find  a  wife  suitable  to  a  «bishop  of  the church».  Blarer's 
choice  of  Katherine  Walter  seems  to have  been  a good  one. They  were  wedded  in 
August  1533. Many  indicators  point  to  their  marriage  having  been  a  happy  one, 
among  these  were  a number  of  spiritual  songs  in which  Blarer  extols  the  benefits 
of  married  life25.  Not  only  does  he  point  to  the  negative  effect  celibacy  has  on 
priests,  but  he  also  suggests  how  a  god-given  chaste  woman  helps  dispel  lone-
liness  and  misery,  for  which  qualities  the  writer  encourages  his  readers  to  be 
grateful  to God. 

As  may  have  become  apparent  from  the  cases  we  cited,  women  in  cloisters 
seem  to have  had qualities  that proved  particularly  attractive  to ex-priests  or  budd-
ing  ministers  of  the  divine  word.  The  majority  of  these  women  during  the  early 

24  Blarer's songs were published in 1562. For a good biography of the reformer of the city 
of  Constance,  cf.  Theodor  Pressel,  Ambrosius  Blaurer,  nach  handschriftlichen  und 
gleichzeitigen  Quellen,  Elberfeld  1861, (Leben  und  ausgewählte  Schriften  der  Väter 
und  Begründer  der reformirten  Kirche 9) [abbr.: Pressel, Blaurer]. On 93f of his work 
Pressel  provides  a copy of Blarer's  «Ein  christlicher  Bulbrief».  Cf. also: Der Konstan(cid:173)
zer Reformator  Ambrosius  Blarer,  1492-1564, Gedenkschrift  zu seinem 400. Todestag, 
ed. by Bernd Moeller, Konstanz 1964. 

25  Cf. Pressel, Blaurer, Appendix  V. Three of the reprinted  «spiritual  songs» focus on the 

happy estate of Christian marriage, 585, 586f, 606f. 

137 

twenties  and  thirties  of  the  sixteenth  Century  came  from  homes  of  burghers  of 
some  standing  and  means  and  from  the  ranks  of  the  noble-born.  Some  of  the  sis-
ters  had  brought  substantial  resources  with  them  when  they  entered  the  religious 
Community  of  their  choice.  The  majority  of  them  appear  to  have  been  literate. 
They  corresponded  with  learned  contemporaries  from  within  their  cloisters,  enga-
ged  in  extensive  socio-political  activities  and,  on  occasion,  wielded  a  fair  amount 
of  power  and  influence.  Both  the  Oetenbach  and  Fraumünster  cloisters  had  a  tra-
dition  of  learning  and  influence  that reached  back  into the fifteenth  Century. 

While  much  of  the  reading  available  in  cloisters  may  have  been  of  the  devo-
tional  kind  -  often  in  the  mystical  tradition  -  we  know  that  the  houses  in  the  Zü(cid:173)
rich  area  were  also  acquainted  with  the  new  religious  and  spiritual  trends  of  their 
day,  with  sisters  clearly  taking  sides  for  or  against.  Extant  court  records  would 
suggest  that  the  settling  of  property  matters  was  generally  a  difficult  issue  when 
some  sisters  chose  the  outside  world  while  others  preferred  to  remain  true  to  their 
vows  and  to  the  patterns  of  spirituality  they  had  learned  to  love  and  respect.  The 
independence  of  spirit  of  cloistered  women  showed  itself  most  fully  when  upon 
the  pending  dissolution  of  a  sister  house  its  occupants  refused,  or  politely  declin-
ed,  trusteeship  by  all-too-willing  city  Councils. 

Outside  of  convent  walls  women  at  the  time  of  Zwingli  (and  for  several  deca-
des  beyond)  seem  to  have  had  fewer  opportunities  to  function  as  equals  to  men  in 
learning,  business  affairs  and  in  «public  life».  However,  daughters  of  craftsmen 
and  shop  keepers  were  taught  the  necessary  skills  to  manage  a  complex  house-
hold.  On  the  farm  as  well,  women  learned  to  carry  out  the  duties  of  cooking, 
sewing,  gardening  and  how  to  participate  with  the  men  in  doing  the  daily  chores. 
In  most  respects  social  conditions  in  Switzerland  do  not  appear  to  have  been  mar-
kedly  different  from  conditions  to the  north  and  south,  even  though  public  opinion 
in  Swabian  lands  had  it that  Swiss  peasants  were  somewhat  uncouth. 

Did  the  liberty  of  the  gospel  bring  any  changes  to  sixteenth  Century  society  in 
Zwingli's  Zürich  and  in  other  areas  under  Protestant  influence26?  Obviously,  the 
office  of  pastor  was  not  open  to  women  any  more  man  were  trade  guilds.  Though 
some  women  attained  a  high  level  of  academic  training,  encouraged  by  men  of 
humanist  leanings,  no  woman  was  given  a  teaching  position  or  professorship.  In 
literary  productions  and  in  social  activities  such  as  the  care  of  orphans,  the  elderly 
and  the  sick,  and  in  alleviating  the  plight  of  refugees,  some  women  left  their  mark 
and  were  given  appropriate  recognition27. 

26  Roben  Stupperich  discusses  publication  activities  of  women  in  the  sixteenth  Century 
with  particular  reference  to  the  German  Situation.  Cf.  Robert  Stupperich,  Die  Frau  in 
der  Publizistik  der  Reformationszeit,  in:  Archiv  für  Kulturgeschichte  37,  1955, 204-
233. There seem to be many similarities to the Situation in Switzerland at that time. 
See  Albert  Brückner,  Weibliche  Schreibtätigkeit  im  schweizerischen  Spätmittelalter, 
in: Festschrift  Bernhard  Bischoff,  zu  seinem  65. Geburtstag  hrsg. von Johanne  Auten-
rieth  und  Franz  Brunhölzl,  Stuttgart  1971, 441-448.  Hansueli  F.  Etter  und  Jürg  E. 
Schneider,  Zur  Stellung  von  Kind  und Frau  im  Frühmittelalter,  in: ZSA  39,  1982, 48-
57.  A  recent  study  which  we could  not  use  for  this  paper  was  published  by  Angelika 

27 

138 

One  of  the  spheres  of  social  interaction  that  seems  to  have  undergone  changes 
for  the  better  was  marriage.  Noteworthy  is  the  introduction  in  Zürich  in  1525  of 
the  so-called  Ehegericht  -  a  form  of  marriage  court  -  which  was  soon  imitated  by 
other  sixteenth  Century  cities. The  largely  untapped  records  of  this  novel  social  In(cid:173)
stitution  would  suggest,  even  on  cursory  examination,  that  women  had  a  very  de-
finite  place  in  the  social  fabric  of  the  day,  with  some  advantages,  definite  respon-
sibilities  and,  as  yet,  limited  power  and  influence.  It  must  be  acknowledged,  of 
course,  that  contemporary  caricatures  of  marriage  do  not  always  paint  too  rosy  a 
picture  of  the  married  State;  wife  beating,  on  the  one  hand,  and  hysterical  house 
dragons,  on  the  other,  were  seen  as  inevitable  by-products  of  the  close  interaction 
between  the  sexes.  Nonetheless,  marriage  was  considered  normative  and  was 
entered  upon  at  a  relatively  early  age.  Second  and  third  marriages  were  not  un-
common,  since  men  often  died  young  on  mercenary  missions  and  women  lost 
their  lives  in  the  course  of  child  bearing.  Young  women  often  married  men  consi-
derably  older  and  on  occasion  some  rather  complex  entanglements  were  the  result. 

One  such  was  the  case  of  a  certain  Michael  Back  from  Cannstatt  in  Württem(cid:173)
berg28.  He  had  come  to  Zürich  with  a  woman  who  allegedly  was  his  wife.  It 
turned  out  that  Back,  a  priest,  had  taken  the  woman  in  when  she  sought  refuge 
from  the  tyrannical  behaviour  of  her  husband,  the  city  clerk  of  Cannstatt,  who  not 
only  beat  her  regularly  but  carried  on  with  the  maid  servants  as  well.  Because  of 
his  position  in  the  Community  he  apparently  managed  to  evade  the  law,  leaving 
the  woman  no  Option  but  to  walk  out  on  him.  Everything  worked  well  as  long  as 
she  and  Back  stayed  in  Zürich.  When  they  returned  to  their  homeland  for  some 
unexplained  reason,  the  woman  was  charged,  convicted  and  eventually  sentenced 
to  death  by  drowning.  Ambrosius  Blarer,  reporting  the  matter  to  Bullinger  (7  July 
1536)  regretted  the  course  of  events,  but  accepted  the  consequences  with  the 
rather  laconic  remark:  «Sie  starb  als  eine  Christin»  (She  died  as  a  Christian 
woman). 

society  did  not 

readily 

tolerate 

Sixteenth-century 

live-in  arrangements 
«without  the  benefit  of  clergy».  Through  the  Eheordnungen  private  marriages 
were  outlawed,  but  in  Zürich,  at  least,  marriage  breakdown  was  accepted  when 
unfaithfulness,  adultery,  or  departure  by  one  of  the  partners  from  the  common  re-
sidence  could  be  clearly  established.  In  such  instances  laws  prevailed  which  pro-
tected  the  woman  as much  as  the  man  and  which  stipulated  the  most  equitable  di-
vision  of  property29.  We  must  comment  -  ever  so  briefly  -  on  pre-marital  sex. 

Nowicki-Pastuschka,  Frauen  in  der  Reformation,  Untersuchungen  zum  Verhalten  von 
Frauen  in  den Reichsstädten  Augsburg  und Nürnberg  zur  reformatorischen  Bewegung 
zwischen  1517 und  1537, Pfaffenweiler  1990, (Forum Frauengeschichte 2). 

28  Cf.  Gustav  Bossen,  D.  Johann  Mantels  Lebensende  und  der  Eheprozeß  des  Michael 

29 

Back und seiner Gattin, in: ARG  12, 1915, 161-204. 
It  is  also  true,  of  course,  that  tightened  regulations  brought  with  them  a  certain 
harshness  to the point of clergy  concerning  themselves  with the behaviour of parishio-
ners and morality courts legislating  on what they deemed to be appropriate clothes and 
behaviour  patteras  for  women  and  men.  Most  of  these  now  seem  either  repressive  or 

139 

While  it  was  not  condoned,  the  reality  of  deflowering  was  faced  fairly  realisti-
cally.  It  was  generally  tolerated  as  a  step  that  would  lead  to  marriage.  Where  mar-
riage  proved  to  be  out  of  the  question,  specific  penalties  were  imposed  on  the 
«guilty»  party,  if the  case  was  brought  to  family  court. 

Generally  speaking,  sixteenth  Century  society  coped  with  the  potentially 
harmful  consequences  of  male-female  relations  by  discouraging  close  interaction 
between  men  and  women  outside  marriage  other  than  in  such  accepted  situations 
as  the  doctor-patient,  pastor-parishioner,  and  increasingly  the  scholar-student  re-
lationships  (the  latter,  in  particular,  was  encouraged  by  those  humanists  who  wor-
ked  toward  overcoming  prevalent  prejudices  pertaining  to  such  encounters).  Insi-
nuations  and  caricatures  pointing  to  the  hilarious  or  dangerous  aspects  of  these 
relationships  were  ever present,  of  course30. 

The  last  source  which  yields  information  regarding  prevalent  attitudes  toward 
women  is the  morality  play.  Two  such  plays  in particular  enjoyed  some  popularity 
in  Switzerland  in  Zwingli's  era.  The  first  was  written  by  Sixtus  Birck  and  entitled 
«Eyn  schön  geystlich  Spiel  ...  Got  zu  lob  und  allen  frouwen  und  jungfrouwen  zu 
eeren  und  bestendigkeit  jrer  kuenschheit  (sie),  etc»31.  Susanna,  the  heroine,  is 
depicted  as  a  «righteous  and  God-fearing  woman»  of  some  Standing  in  the  Com(cid:173)
munity.  The  plot  of  the  play  centres  on  two  men  who  seek  to  entice  her  into  an 
extra-marital  relationship  with  them.  They  try  to  rape  her.  However,  Susanna's 
virtue  and  steadfastness  is  such  that  she  not  only  resists  their  advances  success-
fully,  but  miraculously  causes  them  to be  Struck  with  blindness.  A  scandal  ensues. 
The  heroine  has  to  be  »examined»  (obviously,  the  playwright  must  lay  to  rest  any 
suspicions).  She  is  vindicated,  of  course.  This  allows  the  playwright  to  wax  elo(cid:173)
quent  on  feminine  virtue  and morality  and  to end  his  play  happily. 

The  second  play  we  reviewed  was  written  by  Bullinger  when  he  was  a  young 
schoolmaster  at  Kappel.  It  is  an  indigenized  version  of  Lucretia  and  Brutus32.  The 

ridiculous. Women  were losing power as they left  cloistered  life or when monastic pro-
perties that had been under their sole control were placed in the Charge of male trustees. 
Cf. Alice Zimmerli-Witschi, Frauen in der Reformationszeit,  Diss. phil. I Zürich, Zürich 
1981, 80ff. 

30  Cf.  Leo  Zehnder,  Volkskundliches  in  der  älteren  schweizerischen  Chronistik,  Basel 
1976, (Schriften  der Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  für  Volkskunde  60). The author no-
tes some of the most prominent  rules, laws and traditions  pertaining  to accepted  social 
practices,  the  proper  clothing  and  activities  appropriate  to  men  and  women  respecti-
vely.  To  cite  one  of  the  many  examples  he  gives,  a  woman  wearing  men's  clothing 
would  face  stiff  penalties  and  in  extreme  cases  the  death  penalty.  See  especially  p. 
108f. 

31  Cf.  Sixtus Birck, Eyn schön geystlich Spiel, Zürich  1532. 
32  H. Bullinger,  Ein  schön  spil von der  geschieht  der Edlen  Römerin Lucretiae  unnd  wie 
der Tyrannisch  küng  Tarquinius  Superbus  von Rhom  vertriben  und sunderlich  von der 
standhafftigkeit  Junij  Bruti  des  Ersten  Consuls  zuo  Rhom,  (HBBibl  I,  Nr.  39-41,  p. 
24f). The play was published  in Basel by Thomas Wolff  in  1533, though it was written 
a few  years earlier. Also dealing with the legend of Lucretia, Hans Sachs of Nuremberg 
produced  his «Tragedia von der Lukretia»  around  1527; but the play was not published 

140 

heroine is described as «gantz zuechtig und schamhaft...  mit zimlicher bekleydung 
in schwartz, on allen pracht». Like Birck's play, this one, too, extols the virtues of 
a  Christian  woman  and  reflects  what  seem  to  have  been  prevalent  attitudes  con-
cerning men and women in their licit relationships. 

Two plays cannot be used as conclusive evidence  of dominant notions  and at(cid:173)

titudes.  Their  moral  tone  does,  however,  tally  with  the  picture  of  women  at  the 
time of Zwingli that has emerged from  the other material we examined. 

What conclusions  about women in Zwingli's  world may  we draw on the basis 

of the above review of selected extant  sources? 

It is clear, above all eise, that life afforded  few joys or luxuries for either men 
or women. Rules  and regulations proscribed  dancing,  excessive eating  and  drink-
ing and  frequent  occasions  of  public  amusement  (our  own  notion  of  earning  mo-
ney  to  enjoy  life  at the  ball  park  or  at  cottage  or beach  would  have been  totally 
alien  to  respectable  Citizens  of  Zürich  or  elsewhere  during  the  early  part  of  the 
sixteenth  Century). The  noble-born,  living  behind  Castle  walls,  seem  to  have  fol-
lowed somewhat different  rules of conduct. 

When  one  looks  at  the  Hans  Asper  portraits  of  prominent  men  or  women  of 
Zürich  society  one  is impressed,  however,  by  an air of  well-being  and  self-confi-
dence  which  suggests  that  women  in these  circles were not  second-class Citizens. 
They  occupied  a  place  of  honour  and  respect  within  the  private  sphere  of  their 
homes  and  held  an  acknowledged  place  within  the public  domain  in  which  their 
husbands  played  out  their  roles.  Burghers'  wives  who enjoyed  such  standing  and 
wealth  were,  of  course,  in  the  minority.  Women  on  their  own  were  not  as  yet 
socially  acceptable  and  a  certain  paternalism  undoubtedly  prevailed,  protecting 
women  as  the  weaker  sex.  In  some  instances  women  were  thus  «put  in  their 
place»  and  put  down33.  On  the  positive  side,  sixteenth-century  paternalism  ex-
presses  admiration  of  feminine  beauty,  wisdom,  or wealth  and  the  sentiment  that 
women  ought to be cherished. One may recall  in this connection Luther's  promise 
to reward  his Kate, should  she read the Bible diligently34.  In a similar vein,  Urba-
nus Rhegius assured his readers that the answers he provided in his «Dialogus von 
der trostreichen  Predigt» (1530) were given in response to questions put to him by 
real  women.  Not  less  condescending  was  Kessler  in  his  «Sabbata»35  when,  after 
describing  the  execution  of  a Protestant  woman  he  quips  «God  be  honoured  and 
praised for having effected  such strength in so feeble  a vessel, to his honour and to 
our salvation». 

until  1561. See Heinrich  Bullinger, Hans Sachs, Lucretia-Dramen, ed. by Horst Hart(cid:173)
mann, Leipzig 1973 (Bibliographisches Institut, Textausgaben). 

33  Kessler speaks of women as contributing to «grusame und vermessentliche irrthumb» 
(Johannes  Kesslers  Sabbata  mit  kleineren  Schriften,  ed.  by  Emil Egli- und  Rudolf 
Schock, St. Gallen  1902 [abbr.: Kessler, Sabbata], see Quellen zur Geschichte der Täu(cid:173)
fer in der Schweiz, vol. 2: Ostschweiz, ed. by Heinold Fast, Zürich 1973, p. 618). 

34  WA Br 7, 317. 
35  Kessler, Sabbata II  141. 

141 

While  some  in  Zwingli's  world  appear  to  have  reached  the  conclusion  that 
women  were  not  fully  human,  others  addressed  them  as  «sisters  in  Christ»  and 
saw them  as equal to men, though ordained by God to be in subordinate positions 
in the natural order of things. 

Evangelical  teaching  and humanist  tenets together did not come close, during 
the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  Century, to  emancipating  women.  1t seems  that,  on 
the whole, women were encouraged  to accept their Status with equanimity. It took 
several more generations before the theological tenet of Christian liberty became a 
dominant force  enabling men and women to accept changing roles, and centuries, 
before the equality of women and men was firmly  established in Western  thought. 

Prof. Dr. Eward J. Furcha, McGill University, 3520 University Street, Montreal, PQ, Canada 
H3A 2A7 

142 

