The Defense of Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli, and 

the Baptists, by Katharina  Schütz  Zell 

by  ELSIE  A N NE  M C K EE 

The  sixteenth  Century  is  known  as  a  time  of  religious  conflict  as  well  as  religious 
renewal.  Especially  as  the  first  generation  passed  from  the  scene,  and  leaders  born 
in  a  divided  Christendom  reached  maturity,  confessional  stances  hardened  and 
intra-Protestant  polemic  became  as  sharp  as  any  exchanges  between  Roman 
Catholics  and  Protestants.  The  topic  of  this  essay  is  the  reaction  of  one  surviving 
first  generation  reformer  to  the  gradual  narrowing  of  religious  vision  in  Protestant 
orthodoxy.  The  chief  second  generation  critic  here  is  Ludwig  Rabus  (1524-1592). 
Those  whom  Rabus  characterized  as  heretics  are  Caspar  Schwenckfeld  (1489-
1561),  Ulrich  Zwingli  (1484-1531),  Johannes  Oecolampadius  (1482-1531),  Hein(cid:173)
rich  Bullinger  (1504-1575),  and  the  «(Ana)Baptists».  The  defender  of  the  first 
generation  is  Katharina  Schütz  Zell  of  Strasbourg  (14987-1562),  who  acquired  the 
title of  heretic  for  her  life-long  championing  of  the  unpopulär. 

The  objective  here  is  a  case  study  of  one  lay  reformer's  defense  of  fellow-be-
lievers,  and  thus  the  primary  focus  is  Katharina  Schütz  Zell's  (KSZ)  exchange  of 
letters  with  Ludwig  Rabus,  which  she  published  at  the  end  of  1557  as  «Ein  Brieff 
an  die  gantze  Burgerschafft  der  Statt  Straszburg...»1  In  this  article,  only  limited 
attention  is given  to  outside  sources,  although  the larger  work  of  which  the  present 
essay  is  a  part  will  include  historical  evaluation  of  the  accuracy  of  the  various 
charges  and  counter-charges2.  Center  stage  here  is  the  argument  between  the  two 
correspondents,  and  especially  KSZ's  understanding  of  Protestant  contession  and 
the  nature  of  religious  «tolerance». 

1 

Füll  title:  Ein  Brieff  an  die  gantze  Burgerschafft  der  Statt  Straszburg/  von  Katherina 
Zellin/ dessen jetz  säligen Matthei Zellen/ deß alten und ersten Predigers  des  Evangelii 
diser Statt/ nachgelassne  Ehefraw/  Betreffend  Herr Ludwigen  Rabus/ jetz  ein Prediger 
der Statt Ulm/ sampt zweyen brieffen  ir und sein/ die mag mengklich  lesen und urthei-
len  on  gunst  und  hassz/  sonder  allein  der  warheit  warnemen.  Dabey  auch  ein  sanffte 
antwort/ auff jeden  Artickel/ seines brieffs,  [Strasbourg]  30. Dec.  1557. (Notes refer  to 
the  pagination  of  this edition).  See Marc Lienhard,  Catherine  Zell, nee  Schütz, in: Bi-
bliotheca  dissidentium,  repertoire  des  non-conformistes  religieux  des  seizieme  et  dix-
septieme  siecles,  ed. par  Andre  Seguenny,  vol.  1, Baden-Baden  1980, BBAur  79, pp. 
115-118,  for  description  [abbr.:  Lienhard,  Zell].  For  an  earlier  letter  (not  published 
here), see n. 6. 

2  My  work  in progress:  Elsie Anne  McKee,  Katharina  Schütz  Zell, The Life,  Theology, 
and Writings of a Sixteenth-Century  Reformer  [abbr.: McKee, KSZ]. The book as pre-
sently  planned  will  have  two  parts,  one  a  biographical-theological  study,  the  other  a 
critical  edition  of  her  writings. For  convenience,  Katharina  Schütz  Zell  is here  desig(cid:173)
nated  KSZ. This  matter  and  other  questions  raised  in  this  article  will  be  treated  more 
fully  in the book. 

245 

The method followed  is a close reading of the text, combined  with a consider-
able  re-arrangement  of  the  individual  parts  in  order  to make  the  argument  easily 
accessible.  The  letters  were  written  over  a period  of  two  years,  and  some  points 
recur a number of times, sometimes  (though not always!) with  slight variations of 
nuance. Added to the problem of repetition  is the diffuseness  of KSZ's style. Indi(cid:173)
vidual  issues  are  often  argued  with  remarkable  tenacity  and  logical  coherence; 
KSZ can push her Opponent into a rather tight corner on occasion. The ensemble, 
however,  was  not  conceived  as  a  single  piece,  and  a proper  appreciation  for  the 
cogency  of  KSZ's  work  may  be  obscured  by  the many  details  and  occasional  di-
gressions which enrich but also sometimes overload the text. 

Katharina  Schütz,  a  devout  young  Strasbourg  Citizen  from  a  respected  arti-
sanal  family,  was  one  of  the first  women  to marry  a priest,  the populär  cathedral 
preacher Matthew Zell (1477-1548)3. Understanding herseif  as a reformer,  partner 
with  her  husband,  colleague  of  his  colleagues  in  the  gospel  (both  in  Strasbourg 
and  abroad), KSZ  was respected  and  loved  by  the many  people  she helped,  and 
feared  by those whom her strength, determination, and sometimes sharp tongue ir-
ritated. Over the course of nearly thirty-five  years (1524-1558), from  shortly  after 
her  marriage  in  1523 until four  years before  her death, KSZ  wrote  and  published 
as  well  as  spoke  and  acted.  This  unusually  long  life  for  a lay  author4,  this  novel 
and  «unseemly»  activity  on  the  part  of  a  woman,  impressed  many people,  but  it 
did  not  always  win  KSZ  friends.  Nor  did  her  unstinted  kindness  to  anyone  who 
sought  her help. Some  people  thought  KSZ  was  indiscriminate,  if  not  downright 
heretical, in both her religious views and her charity. 

The Rev. Dr. Ludwig Rabus is the other protagonist  in the exchange of letters 

studied  here. Rabus  was  a young  Protestant  from  Memmingen,  educated  in  Wit(cid:173)
tenberg  and Tübingen,  where  he received  his doctorate  in  1553. During his early 
Strasbourg  years,  Rabus  lived  with  the  Zells,  and  they  and  others  in  Strasbourg 
helped  him  during  his  doctoral  studies. At  the  beginning  of  his  ministry,  Rabus 
served as Matthew Zell's assistant at the cathedral in Strasbourg, and then as Zell's 
successor after  the latter's death in  1548. Late in  1556 Rabus moved to Ulm to be 
Superintendent  and  pastor  of  that  church.  Rabus  is  best  known  for  his  martyro-

For a fairly  complete secondary source bibliography  of KSZ to  1980, see Lienhard, 
Zell, pp. 104-107. References to Matthew Zell are common in literature on Strasbourg, 
but few works are devoted to him. The most extensive is an edition and study of Zell's 
major  writing,  «Christliche  Verantwortung»;  see  the  doctoral  thesis  of  M.  Weyer, 
L'Apologie  Chretienne  du Reformateur  Strasbourgeois  Matthieu  Zell,  3 vols., Stras(cid:173)
bourg  1981. The most extensive recent  work on KSZ is a master's thesis by U.  Lie-
benau, Catherine Zell, une mere de l'eglise, sa pensee ä travers l'analyse de ses ecrits, 2 
vols., Strasbourg 1987. 
See Lienhard, Zell, pp. 108-125, for description of her published and unpublished writ-
ings and letters. See P. A. Russell,  Lay Theology  in the Reformation,  Populär Pam-
phleteers in Southwest Germany, 1521-1525, Cambridge 1986, pp. 204-208. 

246 

logy,  though  the  latter  never  became  as  famous  as  those  of  his  contemporaries 
Jean Crespin and John Foxe5. 

«Ein  Brieff  an  die  gantze  Burgerschafft  der  Statt  Straszburg»  consists  of  a 
number of letters by KSZ, and one by Ludwig Rabus. KSZ wrote the first  letter at 
the  end  of  December  1555, and  added  another,  shorter  piece  to  this  in  February 
1556, before  sending the  whole  to  Rabus,  at that  time  still  in  Strasbourg.  Rabus 
returned  the letters  (unread, KSZ Claims). The third letter, written in March  1557, 
was sent by KSZ to Rabus in Ulm. His reply  is dated  19. April  1557. KSZ analyz-
ed  this  brief  note  in  exhaustive  detail,  point  by  point,  during  the  latter  part  of 
1557,  and  published  the  whole  correspondence,  along  with  a dedicatory  letter  to 
the city  of  Strasbourg,  at the end of December  15576. KSZ arranged  the letters in 
an order to support her argument, but in 1753 J. C. Füsslin  included a modernized, 
chronologically  organized  Version  of  «Ein  Brieff»  in  his  collection  of  sources of 
Reformation  history.  The  present  study,  however,  is  based  on  the  original  text, 
since Füsslin's edition was not always accurate7. 

This essay  is organized in two parts, with a brief  conclusion.  Section one con(cid:173)
sists  of  Ludwig Rabus' indictment  of  Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli,  the  «Anabaptists», 
KSZ, and others, first  as these accusations  are found  in his letter, and then as they 
are assembled  from  KSZ's report  of Rabus' preaching  and conversation. The sec-
ond and much longer part of the article is KSZ's defense  of herseif  and her  fellow 
reformers,  divided  into  four  subsections:  1) KSZ's  acquaintance  with  the  people 
accused,  2)  her  defense  of  the  individuals  and  their  faith,  3)  an  exposition  of 
theological  confession  and religious  tolerance  and their  limits  as practiced  by  the 
Zells, 4) and finally  KSZ's counter-charges against Rabus himself. 

5 

For a recent brief study, see R. Kolb, For All the Saints, Changing Perceptions of Mar-
tyrdom and Sainthood in the Lutheran Reformation, Macon, GA 1987, chap. 2 [abbr.: 
Kolb, For All the Saints]. Below, n. 18f, 44 for support; nn. 9, 36, 73f for martyrology. 
6  KSZ to Rabus: 27. 12. 1555 (L3r-N3v); 6. 2. 1556 (N3v-N5v); 24. 3. 1557 (B2v-E2r); 
Rabus to KSZ: 19. 4. 1557 (Blv-B2r); KSZ to Rabus: between end of April and end of 
Dec.  1557  (E2v-L2v);  KSZ  to  Strasbourg:  Dec.  1557?  (A2r-Blr,  B2r,  L3r, N5v). 
Claims unread, B2v. In the Archives du Chapitre Saint-Thomas de Strasbourg (76, 46), 
in the Archives Municipales, there exists an autograph letter of KSZ to Schwenckfeld 
dated  19. Oct. 1553. This long letter (12 Mio pages recto-verso, filled  with fine writ-
ing) considerably enriches the earlier history of KSZ's relationship with Rabus. For a 
number of reasons, including limited space here, this 1553 letter does not figure in the 
present article, apart  from  a few notes  (9, 25, 26, 29, 32, 63, 66, 68, 69). It will be 
discussed in füll in my longer work. 
Johann Conrad Füsslin, Beyträge  zur  Erläuterung  der  Kirchen-Reformations-Ge(cid:173)
schichte des Schweitzerlandes, part 5, Zürich  1753, pp. 191-354 [abbr.: Füsslin, Bey(cid:173)
träge], Examples of Füsslin's errors in: McKee, KSZ; for the most notable, see n. 40. 

7 

247 

/. Ludwig Rabus' Charges ofHeresy,  etc. 

1. Rabus' Letter 

To begin with Ludwig Rabus' letter of  19. April  1557 is to begin, chronologically, 
two-thirds  of  the  way  through  the  correspondence,  but  this  is  necessary  if  one 
would  have  the  charges  against  Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli,  the  «Anabaptists»,  and 
especially  KSZ herseif  in Rabus' own  words. The letter, which KSZ  says that she 
has transcribed word-for-word,  is brief and worth quoting in füll: 

«Mein  glory,  rumm  und  trost/ in dem  gecreutzigten  Christo. Dein  Heidnisch/ 
unchristlich/  erstuncken/  und  erlogen  schreiben/  ist  mir  zuokummen/  den  16. 
Aprilis/  welches  der  Carfreytag  gewesen/  da  ich  sunst  mit  predigen  zimlich 
unrüewig und beladen. Dieweil ich dann im selbigen gifftigen/  neidischen/ er-
stunckenen/  und erlogenen  schreiben  befunden/  Ob dich wol Gott  wunderbar-
lich  heimsuocht/  dennocht  kein  besserung  an dir  zuoverhoffen/  sonder du  für 
und  für  in  schrocklichen  irrthumben/  falscher  zeugnuß/  und  Teuffeiischen 
außgeben  frummer  leut  verstockter  weiß  verharrest.  So  befilhe  ich  dich  dem 
gerechten  Gotts  urtheil/  und hab  deß kein  zweiffei/  er wirt  dir  ein  mal  deins 
Phariseyschen  stoltz/ wolverdiente  belonung geben. Dein  schreiben/ das nicht 
der Geist  Gottes/ welcher  ein  geist  der  warheit  ist/  sonder  des  Teuffels  geist/ 
so ein lugner von anfang gewesen/ auß dir getriben/ wil ich fleissig  auffheben/ 
zum  zeugnuß  deines  unverschampten  mauls/  da  du  tratzlich  darffest  einen 
diener  Christi/ ungehört/  unbefragt/  auffs  aller Teuffelisch  zuo  sehenden  und 
zuo  schmehen/  Damit  man  doch  sehen  mög  die  schönen  früchtlin/  der  selbs 
gewachsenen  stinckenden  Schwenckfelder/  und  dergleichen  Ketzerischen 
hertzen  unnd gemüeter/  Unnd  sag (wie dein  unverschampt  maul freffel  thuot) 
wie  du  zuvor  im  anfang/  mich  beschuldigst/  Ich  hab  meine  herren  mit  den 
dreyen  tagen  bochen  unnd  tratzen  wollen.  Wie  dasselbig  erstuncken/  erlogen 
unnd  auß  dem  Teuffei  on  warheit  geredt  ist.  Also  leugstu  unverschampt  und 
one ehr/ in deinem  andern  schreiben/ auff  mich durchauß. Ist für  dich  zuobit-
ten  so verzihe es  dir Gott. Du hast  aber  in der kirchen  zuo Straßburg  ein sol(cid:173)
che unruow  bald  im  anfang/  und  mit  deinem  frummen  mann  selber  angefan(cid:173)
gen/  Das  ich  gedenck  Gottes  urtheil  werd  dich  dermaleins  treffen.  Und  laß 
mich hinfürt  mit deinen lugen und lester schreiben  zuofriden.  Dunckt dich di-
ser brief  zuo hart/ so gedenck man müesse dem narren  antworten wie es sich 
gebürt. Den  19. Aprilis  1557. 

Ludwig  Rabus/  Doctor  der  heiligen  schrifft  und  superintentens  der  Kirchen 
zuo Ulm/ wider aller Zwinglische/ Stenckfeldische/  Widerteufferische  geister. 

248 

Darneben  aber  ein  armer  schlechter  diener/  deß  gecreutzigsten  Christi/  und 
seiner armen kirchen»8. 
The  sixteenth  Century  is  notable  for  the  uninhibited  character  of  its  polemic, 
but  even  in  such  Company  Rabus'  letter  ranks  as  rather  uncharitable.  As  is  clear 
here,  the  primary  focus  of  his  annoyance  is  KSZ  herseif,  although  the  original 
(and  to  Rabus'  mind  no  doubt  more  important)  opponents  are  seen  in  the  back-
ground. 

A summary  of Rabus' charges  reads almost like a translation of the letter. The 
description  of  KSZ, her writings, and her behavior,  is a succinct  series  of  insults. 
KSZ  is  a  devilish  lier,  a  Schwenckfelder  and  Zwinglian,  heretical,  pharisaic,  a 
false  witness  and  shameless  rumor-monger.  She  has  been  a  trouble-maker  from 
the beginning,  and  there  is  really  not  any  hope  for  her  since  she  continues  stub-
bornly  in  her errors. Her writings  are stinking, poisonous, pagan  lies  and  slander. 
Rabus is sure that God's judgment  will catch up with  KSZ, whom he considers he 
has answered  appropriately  because  she is a fool.  Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli, and the 
«Anabaptists»  also  are  all  heretics,  though  perhaps  the  greatest  venom  is  poured 
on Schwenckfeld,  whose name seemed  to lend  itself  to caricature:  Schwenckfeld-
Stenckfeld-stinking. 

2. Rabus' Charges As Transmitted by KSZ 

In  KSZ's  report  of  Rabus'  criticisms  prior  to  this  letter,  many  of  the  same  points 
are  mentioned.  At  first  the  focus  is  Schwenckfeld,  though  Zwingli,  Oecolampa-
dius, and  Bullinger are mentioned. Later, apparently,  Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli, and 
the  «Anabaptists»  are  lumped  together,  and  KSZ  is  added  to  the  group.  For  the 
sake of clarity here, each figure  will be treated  separately, with criticisms in more-
or-less chronological  order. 

The first  of Rabus' «betes noires»  was Caspar Schwenckfeld.  The letters  from 
Dec.  1555 and Feb.  1556 record that Rabus called  Schwenckfeld  a Eutychian  her-
etic  and  the  source  of  such  heresy,  one  who  denies  the  humanity  of  Christ  and 
drives  people  away  from  public  worship.  There  is  much  name-calling  by  Rabus 
and his friends,  e. g., Johannes Lenglin  and  Mathias Flacius Illyricus. Indeed, Ra(cid:173)
bus  and  Lenglin  cannot  let  a  Single sermon  go by  without  including  negative re-
marks on Schwenckfeld.  Lenglin went so far as to say  «Better papist  than Baptist 
(<Anabaptist>)  or Schwenckfelder»,  and  KSZ challenges Rabus to deny that he is 
also  implicated.  The  way  Rabus'  friend  Melchior  Specker  twists  Schwenckfeld's 
words makes  Specker himself  a laughing-stock.  In fact,  KSZ suspects  that Rabus 
would like to burn  Schwenckfeld  at the stake, like Hus and  Servetus9. The  letters 

8 
9 

Blv-B2r; Blr Claims this is word-for-word. 
L3v; L4v; Mir;  Jvllr-v; M2r; M3v; N4r. There is irony in the comment on Hus, be(cid:173)
cause the latter in fact figures  as one of the great pre-Luther martyrs in Rabus' book, 
Der Heyligen  ausserwöhlten  Gottes Zeugen, Bekennen! und Märtyrern... Historien..., 

249 

from  1557  include  a  report  that  Rabus  wrote  the  Strasbourg  magistrates  that  he 
went to Ulm because Strasbourg was «soft»  on the Mass, the sects,  Schwenckfeld, 
Zwingli, and the Baptists, and the name-calling continues  unabated10. 

Some  of  what  is  said  about  Schwenckfeld  is also  applied  to Zwingli. At  first 
there  is  only  a  reference  to  Rabus  et  al.  teaching  their  students  to  call  Zwingli, 
Oecolampadius,  and  Bullinger  heretics  from  the  pulpit11.  In  the  1557  letters 
Zwingli  is named  heretic,  unbeliever,  enemy  of  God  and  of  Christ, from  the pul(cid:173)
pit, and  in books, letters, conversation.  Rabus is attempting  to wipe out  Zwingli's 
books  and  followers,  such  as  Bullinger.  KSZ  says  that  Rabus  mistakenly  thinks 
that he honors  Martin Luther by denigrating  Zwingli, but Luther would  refuse  to 
be a cover for Rabus' reintroduction of papal ceremonies12. 

Rabus' view  of  those he calls the «Anabaptists»  and  KSZ calls  «Baptists», as 
reported by KSZ, is equally  negative though rather less developed. The  one early 
reference  is  Lenglin's  «Rather  papist  than  Baptist  or  Schwenckfelder».  Later 
Strasbourg's  «softness»  on  the  Baptists  et  al.  serves  as  Rabus'  ostensible  reason 
for  leaving  the  city13.  Strasbourg  itself  comes  in  for  criticism  in  this  connection, 
when Rabus likens the city's reputation to that of Münster14. 

KSZ  notes  some  of  Rabus'  criticisms  of  her.  The  earliest  is  apparently  the 
anonymous but pointed  Statement from  the pulpit that KSZ is discouraging people 
from Coming to worship15. The primary ones in Rabus' letter have been noted: her(cid:173)
etic  and  unbeliever,  her  and  slanderer,  false  witness,  one  who  has  fallen  away 
from  the  true  faith.  KSZ  made  trouble  in  the  church,  specifically  by  receiving 
Zwingli and Oecolampadius in her home when they passed through Strasbourg on 
the way to Marburg  in  152916. KSZ interprets Rabus' letter as almost accusing her 
of the  sin against  the  Holy  Spirit,  when he says  she lies  about him  and  questions 
whether it is legitimate to pray for  her. KSZ insists that she has spoken  truthfully, 
and  it is Rabus  who must  show  that he  has  not  sinned  against  the Holy  Spirit by 
accusing her of lying when he knows better and there are other witnesses. To cap 
the  matter,  KSZ  cites  Luther's  words  about  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a 
Standard17. 

Whether  or not  all  the details  of  KSZ's  records  are  accurate  (and  quite  often 
other  sources  confirm  her  Claims),  the  general  tenor  of  the  reported  criticism 
agrees  with that of the published  letter. The reputation  Rabus left  behind  in Stras-

vol. 2, Strassburg  1554, xlv/r ff  [abbr.: Rabus, Historien]. See the  1553 letter, 4v-7r, 
accusing  Schwenckfeld  of  discouraging  KSZ  from  attending  public  worship.  See 
McKee, KSZ. 

10  D2v; D4v, F2v; F3v; K3v; K4v. 
11  N4v-N5r. 
12  D4v (see n. 35); K3v; F2v, F3r, F3v, K3v; J2v. 
13  Mir; D2v. 
14  Elv. See belowatn. 40. 
15  N4r-v. 
16  G4v; Hlv-H2r. 
17  F4r-v; Glr. See Luther, «Von der sunde widder den heiligen geist», WA 28, esp. 13f. 

250 

bourg  was  not  favorable,  to  say  the  least,  as  he  himself  recognized.  A  contem-
porary  Strasbourg  Roman  Catholic  chronicler  even  praised  «Ein  Brieff»  as  an  ap-
propriate  response  to  Rabus'  behavior.  There  are  always  two  sides  to  every  story, 
and  KSZ  was  probably  a rather  uncomfortable  «church  mother»,  but  it is clear  that 
she  was  not  alone  in her  criticism  of  Rabus'  preaching  and  behavior.  Whatever  the 
final  judgment  (and  this  whole  question  will  be  treated  more  at  length  elsewhere), 
given  the  picture  of  Rabus  that  KSZ  presents  in  «Ein  Brieff»,  it  is  small  wonder 
that  she  feit  it deserved  to be  answered18. 

//.  Katharina  Schütz  Zell's  Defense  and  Counter  Attack 

The  great  bulk  of  the  correspondence  between  Rabus  and  KSZ  was  written  by  the 
latter.  The  tone  of  the  earlier  letters  is  an  irritable  but  hopeful  maternal  one, 
mingling  praise  and  rebuke  but  generally  affectionately  critical.  As  time  passes, 
the  tone  becomes  more  sharp  and  the  criticisms  move  from  affection  to  anger  -
not  entirely  surprisingly,  in  view  of  Rabus'  terse  rudeness.  KSZ's  disappointment 
in  one  she  and  her  husband  had  loved  and  helped  no  doubt  contributed  to  her 
more  sarcastic  tone  toward  the  end  of  the  correspondence,  but  she  is  never  as  uni-
vocally  negative  or  abusive  as  Rabus  in his brief  note19. 

1. KSZ's  Acquaintance  with  the  Accused 

It  is  useful  to  begin  KSZ's  defense  of  her  fellow  reformers  by  noting  her  personal 
acquaintance  with  them,  especially  since  she  suggests  that  part  of  Rabus'  problem 
is  that  he  did  not  really  know  those  whom  he  criticized20.  Of  those  accused, 
Schwenckfeld  was  best  known  to  KSZ.  She  describes  having  read  his  books  for 
twenty-six  years,  having  been  acquainted  with  him  personally  for  twenty-four  or 
twenty-six  years. Along  with  her  husband  she  welcomed  Schwenckfeld  as  a  guest, 
not  only  at  table  but  also  as  house-guest  and  had  had  much  opportunity  to  learn  it 
if  he had  been  a  heretic21. 

KSZ's  personal  acquaintance  with  Zwingli  and  individual  Baptists  was  less 
than  that  with  Schwenckfeld  but  it  was  not  negligible.  Zwingli  and  Oecolampadi-
us  had  stayed  in  the  Zells'  home  for  two  weeks  in  1529,  and  there  were  generally 
good  relationships  and  strong  ties  between  Strasbourg  and  Zürich.  Bullinger  is 

See  Kolb, For  All  the  Saints,  pp. 49-51.  Sebald  Büheler,  Chronique,  ed. L.  Dacheux, 
in:  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  pour  la  Conservation  des  Monuments  Historiques  d'Alsace 
13,  1888, no.  368  [abbr.:  Büheler]. Some  Strasbourgers  (including  former  colleagues) 
think Rabus went to Ulm for reasons of ambition (C4r, K3r). See McKee, KSZ. 

19  L3r-v, B2v;  B2v; F4r-v,  Glv.  Mlv,  N3v, N4r, B2v, F4v. L4v.  B4r;  see also  Büheler, 

18 

no.  18; Kolb, For All the Saints, p. 43. 

20  D4v, F2v (Zwingli and possibly  Schwenckfeld). 
21  M3r, F2v; D4v, F2v, K4r. 

251 

recognized  as  an  honorable  man  to  whom  the  Strasbourg  reformers  deferred22. 
KSZ  is  least  specific  about  her  acquaintances  among  the  Baptists,  though  she 
mentions  hospitality  to  them,  and  other  sources  suggest  a broad  if  not  always  pro-
found  contact  with  the  many  reforming  spirits  who  wandered  through  Strasbourg 
in  the  course  of  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  Century23. 

It  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  the  wide-ranging  character  of  KSZ's  acquain-
tance,  in  order  to  see  these  ties  with  Rabus'  «heretics»  in  perspective.  Certainly 
Schwenckfeld  became,  over  time,  one  of  KSZ's  closer  friends,  particularly  after 
the  passing  of  all  the  other  first  generation  reformers  she  had  known  well24.  The 
importance  of  Martin  Luther  to  the  Zells  was  clearly  affirmed  by  both.  KSZ  has 
only  praise  for  «the  dear  Luther»,  even  when  she  mentions  disagreements  on  the 
sacraments.  Luther  was  the  reformer  par  excellence,  with  Matthew  Zell  close  be-
hind25.  Wolfgang  Capito  ranked  next  after  Luther  and  her  husband  for  KSZ,  but 
she  also  speaks  highly  of  Caspar  Hedio  and  Martin  Bucer,  despite  the  friendly 
conflict  between  Bucer  and  the  Zells  on  a  number  of  occasions26.  KSZ  knew  per-
sonally  and/or  through  their  writings  most  of  the  other  significant  reformers  of  her 
day  and  many  of  the  lesser-known  figures  as  well.  The  more  important  ones 
whom  she  names  in  this  exchange  of  letters  include  (besides  those  mentioned 
above):  Philip  Melanchthon,  Urbanus  Rhegius,  Paul  Fagius,  Conrad  Pelikan,  Jo(cid:173)
hannes  Zwick,  Johannes  Brenz,  Otto  Brunfels,  John  Calvin,  Sebastian  Castellio, 
Johannes  Bugenhagen,  Desiderius  Erasmus,  Johann  Agricola,  Sebastian  Franck, 
Johann  Marbach27.  Many  others  not  mentioned  here  (e. g.,  the  Blaurer  family  and 
Melchior  Ambach),  were  also  good  friends28.  The  Zells  were  not  indiscriminate, 
nor  more  associated  with  «Radicals»  than  with  «Lutheran»  or  «Reformed»  Protes-
tants,  but  their  practice  of  welcoming  people  was  -  and  remained  -  less  narrow 
than  that  of  many  contemporaries. 

2. KSZ's  Defense  of  Individuais 

KSZ  uses  various  kinds  of  evidence  to  defend  Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli,  and  the 
others  against  Rabus'  charges  that  they  (and  she)  are  heretics.  It  is  possible  to 

22  H2r; N5r, D4v (Bullinger). 
23  H2v;  see n. 39, 65 below.  See Quellen  zur Geschichte  der  Täufer,  ed. Manfred  Krebs, 
Hans Georg Rott, Marc Lienhard, Stephen F. Nelson, vol. 7, 8,  15, 16 (Elsaß, part  1-4), 
Gütersloh  1959,  1960,  1986,  1988, [abbr.: QGT). Note KSZ's  references  to Luc  Hack(cid:173)
furt  and Alexander Berner (G3r). 
Long correspondence  with Schwenckfeld;  see Lienhard, Zell, pp.  123-125, for listing. 

24 
25  Constant  references to Luther and his importance; e. g., A3r; F3v; G3r-v; see at nn. 34, 
44, 46f,  49. Hlr.  For Matthew,  see at nn.36, 53, 61 ff.  Pairing  of  Luther and Zell com(cid:173)
mon in KSZ, Klagred uond Ermahnuong; see  1553 letter, 9v,  1 lr, and McKee, KSZ. 

26  B3v, C3r, C4v-Dlr, D2r, G3v, Hlr, Jlr, K3v, Llv, L2r. L4v. See  1553 letter, 6v-7r. 
27  N2v,  A2v,  D2r,  Elv,  G2v,  G3v,  H2v,  H3v,  J2r;  various  combined  lists:  D3v,  Elr-v, 

K3r. 
See correspondence  both by and about KSZ, Lienhard, Zell, pp. 99-103; 123-125. 

28 

252 

collect  from  her  letters  certain  types  of  «objective»  evidence,  as  well  as  creedal 
Statements. Each figure  or group will be considered in turn, with comments organ-
ized in a fashion  KSZ herseif does not  follow. 

In defending  Caspar  Schwenckfeld,  KSZ offers  the  witness  of  others  as  well 
as  her  own  testimony.  Schwenckfeld  was  approved  and  recognized  as  a  fellow 
worker  by  other  Protestant  reformers  and  people. From  the  earliest  letters  to the 
end,  KSZ  insists  that even  those  like  Bucer,  who most  opposed  Schwenckfeld  in 
Strasbourg, never fulminated  against the noble  layman  from  the pulpit but  disput-
ed with him out of the public eye. Most people, including Capito, Zell, and Hedio, 
appreciated  Schwenckfeld,  and  the  first  two  made  him  welcome  in  their  homes. 
The  unimpeachable  Capito  wrote  a  laudatory  preface  to  one  of  Schwenckfeld's 
books. On  his  deathbed,  Strasbourg^  beloved  first  reformer  and  Rabus'  «father», 
Matthew  Zell,  gave  explicit  Instructions  that  Rabus  was  to  leave  Schwenckfeld 
alone29.  The  people  of  Strasbourg  had  no  idea  that  Schwenckfeld  was  a heretic. 
After  hearing  Rabus  and  Lenglin,  some of  them  came to ask  KSZ why  their  first 
pastors  had  never  warned  them  about  this  unknown  danger.  Those  who  read 
Schwenckfeld's  books knew  that Rabus was not  telling the truth about him.  (KSZ 
adds  that  in fact  more people  than  ever  before  are reading  Schwenckfeld's  books 
because  of  Rabus'  and  others1 criticism,  so  that  Rabus  himself  is  spreading  what 
he does not like as the «papists» spread Luther's teaching30!) 

KSZ also describes  the evidence of  Schwenckfeld's  life  and  sufferings  for  the 
gospel.  Preachers  are  always  taking  the  nobility  to  task  for  their  immorality,  but 
Schwenckfeld  has lived a pious life. He has suffered  more for  the gospel than Ra(cid:173)
bus  has.  No  more  than  Luther  did  Schwenckfeld  seek  followers  who  would  be 
called  by  his  name,  but  that  is  no  reason  to  deny  the  good  that  God  has  done 
through  him.  Schwenckfeld  praised,  loved,  and honored  Christ,  and  fought  «with 
us»  for  the  gospel.  If  he  is  persecuted  for  his  faith,  so  was  Christ,  so  were  the 
apostles  and  others.  Schwenckfeld  did  not  drive  people  away  from  worship;  it is 
Rabus' own polemic  which makes people, who came seeking the gospel  and com-
fort, decide not to return31. 

At  one  point  KSZ  seems  to  recognize  implicitly  that  Schwenckfeld  was  per-
haps partly responsible for being misunderstood,  though  she blames Rabus  prima-
rily.  KSZ reminds  Rabus  that  he  had  taught  out  of  Schwenckfeld's  books  before 
he turned  against him, and she later goes on to say that if Rabus would read  these 
books «with humility  and prayer before  God, without negative attitudes  (bösen  af-
fect)», he would find  that Schwenckfeld  does not deny the humanity  of Christ32. 

29  L4v; L4r  («mitarbeitter»  with  Capito, Hedio, Zell); D4v, F2v, K4r; L4v, M2v-M3r, 
N3v, N4r, D4v-Elr. See  1553 letter, 3r-4v; it is notable that in this letter KSZ records 
Matthew including the «Baptists» with Schwenckfeld  as those whom Rabus et al.  are 
to leave alone. 

30  L4v;L3v,Mlv-M2r, N3r, N5r. 
31  L4v, Mlr-v, N2v-N3r, D4v, F3v, K3v-K4r. 
32  L4r, M3r; cf. N2v. See 1553 letter, 10r-l lr. 

253 

KSZ  puts  much  emphasis  on  the approval  of  Schwenckfeld  by  reformers  like 
Zell  and  Capito,  and on the evidence  of  Schwenckfeld's  life  and practice,  but she 
also  insists  on theological  confession.  The earliest  letter  to Rabus  includes  a  long 
and  somewhat  simplistic  defense  of  Schwenckfeld's  teaching  on  the humanity  of 
Christ.  It  seems  that  KSZ may  not have  comprehended  fully  the point  of  the ar-
gument  between  Schwenckfeld  and  those  who  rejected  his  «glorified 
flesh» 
doctrine;  her mass  of  Biblical  references,  while  impressive  in  one  way, is  beside 
the  point  in  another  (KSZ was clearly  a  Biblical  and not a  philosophical  thinker). 
In a sense,  however,  it was of relatively  lesser  importance  to KSZ (and possibly  to 
Matthew)  whefher  or  not  the  philosophy  was  the  same  for  all,  as  long  as  the 
scripture  was33.  In  1557, KSZ  gives  a  richly  Biblical  and  creedal  «confession» 
which  she  attributes 
through 
Schwenckfeld.  The  text  is  Christocentric,  Christ  as  savior,  true  God  and  true 
man34. 

to  all  the  major 

from  Luther  on 

reformers, 

Zwingli  is also  included  as one who affirms  this  confession,  but KSZ does not 
say  much  more  about  the  content  of  the  Swiss  reformer's  faith  -  nor  does  she 
mention  having  read  his  books,  as  she  often  says  of  Luther  and  others.  The pri-
mary  focus  of  KSZ's  defense  of Zwingli  is to point  to the fruit  of his work  for the 
gospel.  Three  different  times, in almost  identical  words,  KSZ speaks  of the  «good 
and  now blessed  Zwingli»  as one «through  whom  God has done  so much  good  to 
an  entire  Confederation.»  KSZ  points  out  that  Rabus  never  knew  Zwingli,  who 
was  reforming  Switzerland  before  Rabus  was  even  born  -  and  she  suggests  that 
Rabus  would  be ashamed  of himself  if he met Zwingli35. 

The  second  most  important  emphasis  in the defense  of Zwingli  is the record  of 
his  suffering  for  the gospel.  Zwingli  has borne  far  more  than  Rabus  ever  will;  he 

33  M3r-N3r  (confession).  KSZ relies  on the scriptural  character  of Schwenckfeld's  work 
(M3r:  «wie  das die schrifft  bezeuget/  welches  doch  Schwenckfeld  nie geleugnet hat/ 
sonder allzeit  bekennt  und noch»), and emphasizes his writings  (L3v, M3r). R. Emmet 
McLaughlin,  Caspar  Schwenckfeld,  Reluctant  Radical, His Life  to  1540, New Haven, 
CT  1986,  (Yale  Historical  Publication  Miscellany  134),  p.  201,  points  out  that 
Schwenckfeld  tended to express himself  more guardedly  in print. For the development 
of  the «glorified  flesh»  doctrine,  see esp. chap. 7. Bucer  (at least  in his 3. Feb. 1534 
letter to Margareta  Blaurer) did not consider KSZ herseif  a Schwenckfelder,  though he 
objected to her Support for this disruptive party; see QGT VIII, p. 271; see at nn. 50ff, 
for Zells' openness; see 1553 letter in n. 63; McKee, KSZ. 

34  D2v-D3v.  Luther,  Zwingli,  Oecolampadius,  Zell,  Capito,  Bucer,  Hedio,  Rhegius, Fa-
gius, Brenz, Schwenckfeld,  et al., and possibly some among the «Baptists»; see n. 39. 

35  D4r-v,  F2v-F3r,  K3r-v.  D4r-v:  «Wie  seind  dann  ir  Jungen  unerfarnen  Menner/  so 
rauch/ ich mein das euch  wilde  leüth im Waldt gezüget  haben/ wie können  ihr so fref-
felich/  den  frummen  unnd  jetzsäligen  Zwinglin/  durch  den  Gott  einer  gantzen  Eyd-
gnoßschafft  so vil  guots  gethon  hat/  also  sehenden/  und begeren  ihn/ sein  Büecher/ 
unnd  glaubens  gnossen  auß zuo reitten/  Den ihr nie  gesehen  und die  arbeit/  creütz/ 
Schmach, schandt/ so er unnd Ecolampadius  sampt andern  alten/ umb der ehren  Christi 
willen/ erlitten  haben/ nie erfaren/  es musten  neun  Evangelii  sampt  Christo  zuo grund 
gehn/ ehe ir das halb litten. Lebten  sie noch/ ihr dörfft  ihnen nicht under die äugen se(cid:173)
hen/ an Kunst und glauben.» Cf. H2r. 

254 

was  insulted  and  reviled  for  his  confession,  as  Christ  was;  he  died  at  the  hands  of 
God's  enemies  as  Christ  did,  he  died  for  his  brothers.  If  Zwingli  was  a  heretic, 
then  so  were  Christ  and  many  others  whom  Rabus  puts  in  his  martyr-book  to  earn 
money!36  KSZ  pairs  Zwingli  with  Luther  as  those  who  dug  up  the  weeds,  plowed, 
planted  with  great  effort,  and  brought  forth  fruit  which  Rabus  enjoys  but  for 
which  he  thanks  Zwingli  by  calling  him  a  heretic  and  enemy  of  God  and  Christ. 
Again,  as  with  Schwenckfeld,  Luther,  and  others,  KSZ  denies  that Zwingli  wanted 
followers  to  be  called  by  his  name,  but  it  is  still  right  to  honor  the  good  which 
God  has  done  through  him37. 

KSZ  does  not  pretend  that  Zwingli  was  perfect.  Like  «us»  (Rabus  and  KSZ) 
and  all  people,  Zwingli  must  say  with  David  in  the  Psalm  (130,  3):  «Lord,  when 
You  enter  into judgment  and  would judge  us, who  could  stand  before  you?»  How-
ever,  Zwingli  confessed  the  chief  points  and  suffered  for  the  gospel,  so  the  words 
of  Christ  apply  to him:  »Wisdom  must  be justified  by her  children»  (Mt  11,19)3 8. 
When  KSZ  speaks  of  the  «Baptists»  there  is  a  slightly  different  combination 
of  factors  in  the  defense.  She  insists  that  there  are  «many  good,  understanding, 
and  God-fearing  learned  people  among  the  Baptists,  people  who  seek  Christ  from 
the  heart.»  She  recognizes  that  there  are  «weak,  unwise,  or  also  bad  ones  among 
them»,  but  she  urges  Rabus  to  examine  himself  and  says  «let  us  have  the  sympa-
thy  (mitleiden)  with  them  that  we  have  with  ourselves.»  KSZ  speaks  well  of  Bap(cid:173)
tist  discipline;  if  Rabus  excommunicated  as  many  people  for  great  faults  as  the 
Baptists  do  for  small  ones,  he  would  soon  have  a  smaller  church.  KSZ  also  points 
out  the  Baptists'  suffering  for  the  gospel;  «many  among  them  have  confessed 
Christ  to  (the  point  of  suffering)  misery,  prison,  fire  and  water.»  It  is  apparent  that 
the  Baptists  KSZ  has  in  mind  are  the  «Evangelical  Anabaptists»,  since  she  re-
proaches  Rabus  for  urging  the  magistrates  to  persecute  peaceful  people  who 
«believe  in Christ  the  Son  of  God  and  do  no  one  any  härm»39. 

KSZ  also  defends  Strasbourg.  Rabus  has  accused  the  city  of  being  «soft»  on 
the  Mass,  the  sects,  Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli,  and  the  Baptists.  KSZ  answers  that 
those  he  attacks  «have  done  neither  him  nor  others  any  härm,  and  pray  to  God 
daily  for  him»,  and  share  our  faith.  Rabus  has  also  told  the  magistrates  that  Stras(cid:173)
bourg  is  a  scandal  in  Germany,  and  is  becoming  a  Münster.  The  indignant  KSZ 

36  D4v, F3r, K3v. See Kolb, For all the Saints, p. 5; below at n. 73. In fact, Zwingli is not 
in  Rabus'  martyrology.  Almost  the  only  Reformed  figure  included  is  the  young  Mat(cid:173)
thew Zell, because he was so Lutheran in his  «Christliche Verantwortung». See Rabus, 
Historien,  vol.  8,  pp.  vii/r  ff  (Juan  Diaz,  Pierre  Bruly,  and  Simon  Grynaeus  are  also 
included). 

F3r. See below atn. 51. 

37  K3v, F3v. On weeds, see n. 67 below. 
38 
39  D3v; Elr.  KSZ seems  implicitly  to recognize  at least  some of the diversity pointed out 
by contemporary  scholars; see James M. Stayer, The Anabaptists, in: Reformation  Eu-
rope, a Guide to Research, ed. Steven Ozment, St. Louis  1982, 135-159. For  difficulties 
with Baptists, Sebastian Brant, Annales, ed. L. Dacheux, in: Bulletin de la Societe pour 
la Conservation des Monuments Historiques d'Alsace,  19, 1899, no. 4771. 

255 

denies  these  charges.  Strasbourg  «has  not  yet  become  Münster,  God  be  praised», 
but  it is an  example  of  mercy,  not  scandal,  to  Germany40. 

In  some  ways  the  entire  correspondence  is  KSZ's  self-defense,  and  much  must 
be  passed  over  in  silence;  however,  it  is  useful  to  highlight  a  few  issues.  KSZ 
seems  most  distressed  by  the  charges  that  she  had  fallen  away  from  the  faith, 
caused  trouble  for  the  church  and  her  husband,  behaved  in  a  way  unfitting  for  a 
woman  of  the  gospel41. 

KSZ  defends  herseif  by  appealing  to  other  witnesses  than  Rabus  and  his 
young  friends.  She  speaks  of  the  respect  and  affection  she  had  received  from  «the 
pillars  of  the  church»  (the  great  reformers),  pointing  out  that  they  had  trusted  and 
used  her  aid.  She  maintains,  in  effect,  that  they  respected  her  as  a  colleague,  not 
just  the  wife  of  a colleague.  This  is particularly  clear  in  the  story  of  Hedio's  death-
bed.  The  dying  reformer  would  not  let  KSZ  leave  him,  although  other  (young) 
ministers  and  his  wife  and  children  were  present;  it  seems  clear  that  Hedio  wanted 
the  last  of  his  old  colleagues  with  him  at his  passing42. 

KSZ  also  appeals  to  Strasbourg  itself  as  witness,  writing  to  the  city  where  she 
has  lived  all  of  her  life,  asking  her  neighbours  to testify  to  anything  wrong  she  has 
done.  She  reminds  Strasbourg  of  the  record  of  her  life,  giving  examples  of  her 
service  to  the  gospel,  the  church,  Strasbourg,  her  husband,  and  all  who  needed 
h e r-  work  she  did  both  with  her  husband  and  after  his  death43.  What  Rabus  calls 
«making  trouble»  was  in  fact  the  struggle  to  establish  the  gospel,  something  for 
which  the  «first  old»  reformers  spent  themselves  unstintingly  and  for  which  they 
got  small  thanks,  certainly  much  less  than  Rabus  himself  has  received  for  doing 
much  less. KSZ  says  that many  people  continue  to come  to her  as  a «little  piece  of 
the  rib  of  that  blessed  Matthew  Zell»,  someone  to  whom  they  could  still  flee  for 
refuge  (as  they  had  always  done  with  the  Zells)44. 

To  defend  the  content  of  her  confession,  KSZ  points  to  two  things  in  particu-
lar.  One  is  the  unity  of  her  faith  with  that  of  her  populär  and  highly  regarded  hus(cid:173)
band45,  the  other  is  her  knowledge  of  and  agreement  with  the  «first  and  best 

40  D2v, Elv. Elv: Rabus said «du Oberkeit hast solche lecker mehr hie/ unnd straffest  nit/ 
des muostu  und deine Stat noch zuom  spott/ schandt unnd Exempel dem gantzen  Teüt-
schen  landt  stan/  und  noch  Münster  werden.»  Füsslin,  Beyträge,  p.  275,  Substitutes 
«erleben» for  «Münster  werden». KSZ answers: «Straßburg  steht noch  nicht zuom  Ex(cid:173)
empel  inn  schand  unnd  spott  dem  Teütschen  landt/  sonder  mehr  zuom  Exempel  der 
barmhertzigkeit/  mit  leidens  und  auffnemung/  der  eilenden/  Ist  auch  noch  nicht  Mun(cid:173)
ster worden/ Gott sey lob.» Füsslin, Beyträge, p. 275 Substitutes «müed» for Munster. 

41  Glv,  G4v, Glv-J3r,  H3r.  See McKee, KSZ. KSZ says  (E3v) that  Rabus  would  like to 

burn her as a witch, with Hus et al. 

A2r-Blrefpa.M/m,-Glv-H3r. 

42  G3r-v; G4r. 
43 
44  G3r-v;  H2r.  KSZ is  sarcastic: Rabus  et al.  are too weak  to cause the  kind  of  «unrest» 
that  the  old  reformers  and  KSZ  did  when  they  suffered  for  working  to  establish  the 
gospel (G3v). B4r, Clv, C2r (cf.  Büheler, no. 18); Llv, C2r. N3v, A3v, B3r. 

45  G4v ff,  H2r-v. See McKee, KSZ. 

256 

books»  of  the  great  reformers,  which  she  has  read  and  studied  more  than  Rabus 
has46. 

KSZ  does  recognize  that  she  is  a  sinner,  that  she  has  not  done  all  that  she 
should  have  done,  and  she clearly  appeals  to God's  mercy  -  but  she  insists  that  she 
is not  guilty  of  the  charges  of  heresy  and  trouble-making  that  Rabus  brings  against 
her.  It  is true  that  she  speaks  roughly  (i. e.,  not  tactfully),  but  what  she  says  is  true, 
not  false.  No  one  has  ever  accused  her  of  the  kinds  of  things  Rabus  does,  even 
people  to  whom  she  has  written  or  spoken  more  sharply  -  and  not  even  Rabus 
himself  in  earlier  years47! 

Perhaps  the  climax  of  KSZ's  argument  is  her  appeal  to  Rabus  against  himself. 
She  demands  of  Rabus  that  he  names  and  proves  his  charges,  and  she  turns  some 
of  his  accusations  into  self-indictments.  She  reminds  him  that  he  had  invited  her 
to  live  with  his  family  as  their  mother  when  he  became  her  husband's  successor. 
He  valued  her  witness  to  the  gospel  in  his  earlier  years  as  pastor  so  much  that  he 
once  said  he  would  not  take  forty  gülden  for  what  they  had  spoken  together.  Now 
he  says  that  she  is  hypocritical,  but  if  he  believed  such  evil  of  her  before  and  did 
not  teil  her  sooner,  then  he  is  the  hypocrite48.  When  he  says  that  she  has  now  fall(cid:173)
en  away  from  the  faith,  she  points  to  the  agreement  of  her  confession  with  that  of 
the  earlier  reformers...  and  insists  that  it  is  Rabus  himself  who  has  fallen  away. 
Among  other  things,  he has  changed  Matthew  Zell's  prayers  for  the  Lord's  Supper, 
and  is  teaching  a  different  doctrine  of  baptism  frorn  all  the  first  reformers,  includ-
ing  his  revered  Luther49. 

Before  turning  to  a  fuller  discussion  of  KSZ's  criticism  of  Rabus,  it  is  helpful 

to  examine  the  principles  on  which  she  grounded  her  defense  of  those  whom  Ra(cid:173)
bus  considered  heretics,  and  thus  the basis  for  her  counter-charges  against  him. 

3. The  Zells' Understanding  of  Faith,  «Tolerance»,  and  Limits 

KSZ's  understanding  of  the  content  of  faith,  her  practical  expression  of  it,  and  her 
ideas  of  what  might  be  called  «tolerance»50,  are  interwoven,  but  each  is  a  distinct 
part  of  a  whole.  Simply  put,  there  are  some  beliefs  necessary  for  a true  confession 

46  References  to books known to her. Luther heads the list: Nlv, N2v, D4r, Elr, E4r, F4v, 
H3v, Jlv, J2r. Schwenckfeld:  L3v, Mlv,  M3r, F2v, K4r. Brenz: N2v, D4r, Elr.  Bucer: 
D4r, J2r-v. «Bellius»  (Castellio): Elr-v.  Staupitz: E4r. Melanchthon:  H3v. Zwick:  J2r. 
Bugenhagen:  J2r.  Savonarola:  Nlv.  «First  and  best  books»  (or  some  equivalent), esp. 
referring  to Luther and his followers: N2v, D4r, E4r, H3v, Jlv, J2r, K3r. E4r. KSZ also 
refers  to  some  of  the  church  fathers,  e.  g.,  Augustine  and  especially  Ambrose.  See 
McKee, KSZ. 

47  H2v; E4v-Flr, J3v. F2r. G3r. G4r. 
48  G4r. H2r,  mretpassim. 
49  H3r-J3r. H3v, H4r-v, J2r. 
50 

Strasbourg developed a reputation for tolerance in the sixteenth Century itself, and not a 
little  scholarly  attention  has  been  devoted  to  the  question.  See  McKee,  KSZ, for  füll 
discussion, and below, n. 56. 

257 

of  the  gospel,  and  so  (active)  rejection  of  these  beliefs  marks  a  boundary  (KSZ  is 
primarily  concerned  with  the  convictions  and  only  incidentally  with  which  per-
sons  are  in  or  out).  Within  the  bounds  of  the  necessary  confession,  differences  on 
«lesser  questions»  may  be  tolerated.  In  any  case,  however,  Christian  charity  is  to 
extend  to  all  people  (though  this  does  not  preclude  a  vigorous  discussion  with 
those  who  differ,  especially  regarding  the  «chief  point»,  «Hauptstück»  of  the  gos(cid:173)
pel). 

In  setting  out  the  various  facets  of  KSZ's  conviction  and  practice,  the  logical 
place  to  begin  is  where  she  herseif  does,  with  the  confessional  basis,  the  «chief 
point»  which  defines  one  as  a Christian  and  on  which  there  must  be  agreement. 

«(Zwingli)  mit  so grossem  ernst/  lieb  und glauben,  mit  vil  schmach  und  arbeit/ 
das  hoch  warhafftig  unnd  nötig  Hauptstuck/  das  Jesus  der  Christ  und  Gottes 
Suon/  deshalben  allein  der  einig  Seligmacher  und  Herr/  alles  fleisch  seie  ge(cid:173)
glaubet/  öffentlichen  gelert/  geprediget/  und  bekandt  hat.»51 
References  to  the  «chief  point»  occur  five  times  in  this  one  series  of  letters, 
and  a  number  of  other  passages  offer  very  similar  summaries  without  actually 
calling  them  «Hauptstuck».  It  is  notable  that  this  «chief  point»  is  explicitly  shared 
«with  us»  by  Schwenckfeld,  Zwingli,  and  the  Baptists -  those  whom  Rabus  accus-
es  by  name.  The  «us»  appears  to  refer  generally  to  all  Protestants  (perhaps  espe(cid:173)
cially  to  the  Standard  bearer  Luther?)52.  It  is  absolutely  clear  that  «Christ  as  the 
true  Son  of  God  and  only  Savior»  (Matthew's  formula)  is  the  key  to  the  Zells'  un-
derstanding  of  the Christian  faith53. 

The  Zells  were  not  indiscriminate;  they  plainly  saw  themselves  as  Protestants 
and  not  Roman  Catholics.  Those  who  share  the  chief  point  are  within  the  gospel; 
those  who  do  not,  are  outside.  The  boundary  cases  are  Rome  and  the  Jews.  KSZ 
says  that  the  chief  point  is  that  on  which  «we»  separated  from  Rome,  that  for 
which  «we»  fought  against  the pope  and  all  unbelieving  works54.  It  is  false  teach-
ing  to  attribute  to  works,  creatures,  elements,  what  belongs  to  Christ  alone.  The 
Mass  and  Interim  are  idolatry,  emergency  baptism  is  great  unbelief  and  error 
which  honors  water  instead  of  Christ,  and  afflicts  poor  mothers  whose  children 
have  died  unbaptized.  KSZ  expresses  the  early  Protestant  objections  to  ceremo-
nies,  to  papal  Ordination  and  sacramental  teaching,  to  all  human  infringements  on 
the  honor  owed  to  Christ  alone.  She  could  and  would  argue  vigorously  with  those 
she believed  were  wrong,  while  yet  accepting  them  as  people55. 

51 
52 

F3r. 
F3r  (Zwingli). D3v,  Elr  (Baptists). G2r  (KSZ). K4r-v  (Schwenckfeld  and  Strasbourg, 
see at n. 63). See also Mir, H3r, K3v, and Zell in n. 53. 

53  D4r, H2v. See below at n. 61. 
54  Elr,  Mir. 
55  Various  negative  references:  Mir,  B4v, Clr,  C3v, Dlv,  G4v, H3v, H4r, Jlv,  J2r, J2v, 
J3r, Llv. Argument  in «Ein Brieff»  is within the group which  shares «the chief  point», 
with  Rabus.  For  an  example  of  KSZ's  «evangelical»  arguments  with  those  she  con-
sidered  outside  the  chief  point,  see the  humorous  note  in Jacob  von  Gottesheim,  Dia(cid:173)
rium  seu Ephemerides,  in: Bulletin  de la Societe pour la Conservation  des  Monuments 

258 

Claiming  that  the  errors  of  Rome  came  from  Judaism,  KSZ  extends  her  com-
ments  on  the  «boundaries»  of  Christian  faith  to  make  clear  the  exclusion  of  Juda(cid:173)
ism  as  such.  The  criticism  is very  traditional,  based  on  the condemnation  of  Christ 
by  «the  Jews»,  and  it  includes  objections  to  legalism  though  not  to  the  law  itself. 
KSZ  says  that  those  good  Jews  who  understood  the  law  followed  Christ,  and  her 
criticism  of  Judaism  is fully  compatible  with  a positive  view  of  the  Old  Testament 
(interpreted  Christologically)56.  This  polemic  against  the  Jews  also  seems  not  to 
have  been  personal;  in  fact,  KSZ  says  that  no  Jew  would  have  treated  her  as  badly 
as  Rabus  has  done,  which  re-inforces  her  characteristic  (though  implicit)  distinc-
tion  between  creed  and  people.  It  is  notable  that  KSZ's  sharpest  criticisms  of  both 
Rome  and  the  Jews  are  indirect;  it  is  Rabus'  adoption  or  practice  of  Roman  or 
Jewish  ideas  which  draws  the most  fire57. 

The  chief  point  of  the  faith  is  clear,  the  boundaries  are  clear,  but  what  about 
the  space  between  and  the  actual  living  of  the  faith?  Differences  on  lesser  matters 
may  be  tolerated,  if  the  chief  point  is  truly  confessed  and  defended.  One  example 
of  tolerable  differences  is  the  Baptists'  views  on  the  «polity»  («Haushaltung»)  of 
the  church,  i.  e.,  their  stricter  discipline.  For  good  measure,  KSZ  continues  by 
pointing  out  that  things  which  Rabus  has  done,  such  as  his  use  of  the  papal  sur-
plice  and  his  abandoning  of  his  Strasbourg  flock,  require  as  much  exercise  of 
tolerance  by  others  as  the  Baptists  demand  of  him,  KSZ  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that 
«you  (Rabus)  should  take  the  blame  that  <we>  are,  in  life  and  teaching,  such  that 
they  (the  Baptists)  separate  themselves  from  us»58. 

The  reason  for  tolerating  differences  is  that  faith  is  a  gift  of  God,  it  cannot  be 
compelled.  For  example,  Jews  ought  not  to  be  persecuted  for  not  believing  in 
Christ.  If  people  do  wrong,  the  magistrates  should  punish  them,  but  faith  cannot 
be  coerced  or  commanded;  it  belongs  to  the  heart  and  conscience,  not  to  the  outer 
person.  It  must  be  said  that  KSZ's  expression  of  this  principle  is  somewhat 

Historiques  d'Alsace  19,  1899, p. 272  (1527), wheire this  rather  tolerant  Roman  Cath-
olic  says that  he was invited to dinner by KSZ becaiuse «sie wolt gern mit  ihm disputi-
ren». 

56  M2r, Clv,  D2v, D4r. N3r, F4r-v, J2v, K3v. M3v, M4v. For more on Christological  In(cid:173)

terpretation,  see KSZ's  «Den Psalmen  Miserere», C8r ff;  see McKee, KSZ. See Daniel 
Husser,  Le plaidoyer pour la tolerance  de Caspar  Schwenckfeld  et ses adeptes ä Stras(cid:173)
bourg  (1529-1631),  in:  Conscience  et  liberte  25,  1983, pp.  74-86.  Husser,  esp.  81 ff, 
cites KSZ's  «Ein Brieff»  as a fine  example of the «aspiration profonde  ä la tolerance et 
au libre-choix  en matiere de foi.»  He states that for  Schwenckfelders  tolerance  did not 
mean  indifference  and  withdrawal,  but  manifested  itself  as  charitable  activity,  social 
justice,  and  personal  morality  rather  than  adherence  to  an  intellectual  System.  Husser 
seems to ignore KSZ's clear affirmation  of the «chief point» -  which  in fact  is doctrinal 
-  and  the  resulting  limits.  Rightly  citing  KSZ's  hospitality  as  characteristic  of 
Schwenckfeld's  followers,  Husser  implies  that  this  openness  is  owed  to  the  fact  that 
KSZ  was  a  Schwenckfelder.  He  does  not  remind  the  reader  that  KSZ's  activity  in 
receiving  refugees  (including  the  examples  which  he  cites,  G2v-G3r)  long  antedates 
her acquaintance with  Schwenckfeld. 

57  Blr; N4r, E2r, A4r. Dlv  (Rabus-Rome-Judaism). 
58  D3v-D4r.  Elr. 

259 

favorably  on 

simplistic,  and  she  does  not  elaborate  on  the  matter,  although  she  has  generally  a 
positive  attitude  toward  some  aspects  of  civil  involvement  in  church  affairs59. 
KSZ's  main  object  here  is,  however,  to  combat  coercion  in  spiritual  matters.  She 
comments 
the  book  which  «the  good  man  Martin  Bellius» 
(Castellio)  wrote  about  how  to  deal  with  those  who  err,  who  are  called  heretics. 
KSZ  lists  names  of  some  of  those  whom  Castellio  quotes.  She  also  speaks  approv-
ingly  of  (early)  works  by  Luther  and  especially  by  Brenz,  on  how  the civil  author-
ity  should  treat  the  Baptists.  It  is  significant  to  note  in  this  context  that  KSZ  ob-
jects  to  the  burning  of  «poor  Servetus»,  but  she  does  not  defend  Servetus'  views60. 
Whether  or  not  the  Zells  ever  offered  hospitality  to  Servetus,  this  notorious  figure 
may  serve  as  an  entry  point  into  the  Zells'  own  expression  and  practice  of  faith 
and  tolerance. 

For  Matthew  and  Katharina  Schütz  Zell,  Christian  fellowship  had  certain 
boundaries;  Christian  charity  had  virtually  none.  It  is  important  to  note  both  fac-
tors.  The  Zells'  approval  of  fellow  believers  had  clear  limits,  but  their  acceptance 
extended  more  widely  than  that  of  most  of  their  contemporaries.  Repeatedly, 
Matthew  affirmed  that  «wer  Christum  für  den  warn  Suonn  Gottes/  und  den  eini(cid:173)
gen  Heilandt  aller  Menschen/  glaub  unnd  bekhen/  der  soll  theil  und  gmein  an  sei(cid:173)
nem  (Zell's)  Tisch  und  Herberg  haben/  er  wolle  auch  theil  und  gemein  mit  im  im 
Himel  haben»61. 

What  went  for  Matthew  went  equally  for  Katharina.  She  affirmed  that  she  and 
her  husband  were  never  other  than  united  in  matters  of  faith  and  also  in  outward 
things.  KSZ  said  she  would  not  have  married  Matthew  if  she  had  not  agreed  with 
him  in  faith,  and  she  spent  her  life  trying  to  fulfill  Matthew's  requests  because  she 
understood  these  as  in  accordance  with  God's  commands.  When  Rabus  accused 
her  of  receiving  heretics  (Zwingli  and  Oecolampadius),  KSZ  responded  that  this 
hospitality  was  Matthew's  will62. 

In  the  conflict  over  Schwenckfeld,  when  he  and  the  Strasbourg  theologians 
disagreed  on  a  number  of  points,  KSZ  insisted  on  remaining  in  fellowship  with 
both  sides. 

«(E)r  (Schwenckfeld)  unnd  sie  (Strasbourgers)/  sich  inn  vilen  dingen  getrent/ 
Das  Haupstuck  aber/  das  Christus  das  Lamb  Gottes  unnd  unser  einiger  erlöser 

59  D4r, Elr.  E. g., KSZ seems to express approval  of a role for civil authorities  in church 
order,  when  she reminds  Rabus  that  he  received  God's  call  to  be pastor  in  Strasbourg 
through  the magistrates, and reproaches  him  for  abandoning  his  vocation  without  giv-
ing them or others any notice (Dlv). 

60  Elr-v.  M2r,  Elr,  E3v.  Probably:  Luther,  Von  weltlicher  Oberkeit,  wie  weit  man  ihr 
Gehorsam  schuldig  sei,  1523, WA  11, 229-281.  Probably:  Brenz,  Ob  eyn  weltliche 
Oberkeyt,... möge die Widerteuffer...  zum tod richten lassen,  1528, in: Johannes Brenz, 
Frühschriften,  part 2, ed. Martin Brecht...  et al,  Tübingen  1974, 472ff  (cf.  498ff). 

61  D4r (quotation), H2v. 
62  G4v-Hlr, A2v; J3r; Hlv-H2r, A2r-v. For KSZ, see esp. G2r, and McKee, KSZ. 

260 

sey/ hab ich alzeit auff beiden seitten befunden/  deshalb ich mich das ander nit 
hab lassen irren/ und beide theil geliebt/ unnd mich von niemants getrent»63. 

The fellowship  held with all who shared  the chief point did not mean all were re-
garded as equally correct, but all were deserving of love. 

«(E)s  syen  die/  so  unserm  lieben  Doctor  Luther  angehangen/  oder  Zwinglin/ 
oder  Schwenckfelt/  und  die  armen  Tauffbrüeder/  Reich  und  arm/  Weiß  und 
unweiß/  nach  der  red  des  heiligen  Pauli/  alle  haben  sie  zuo  uns  dörffen 
khummen/  was hatt  uns  ihre  Nammen  angangen/  wir  seind  auch  nit  gezwun(cid:173)
gen  gewesen/  jedes  meinung  unnd  Glaubens  zuo  sein/  seindt  aber  schuldig 
gewesen/  einem  jeden/  Liebe/  Dienst/  unnd  Barmhertzigkeit  zuo  beweisen/ 
das hatt uns unser Lehrmeister Christus geleret»64. 

The Zells refused  no one their help. Matthew told Katharina frequently  that every-
one  should  have access  to him, and  Katharina  took  this  for  law, and  continued  it 
after  his death. All are called  to share  in Christ's  office  -  not that  of  redemption, 
but  that  of  love  for  one's  neighbour,  doing  for  others  as  Christ  has  done  for  us. 
KSZ teils  Rabus  that he  would  be  like  the priest  and  levite  in the parable  of  the 
Good  Samaritan,  not  like  the  Samaritan  himself,  who  helped  and  cared  for  the 
wounded man without asking of what faith he was65. 

4. KSZ's Counter-Charges  against Rabus 

Interwoven with KSZ's defense  of her faith,  her friends,  and herseif, is an increas-
ingly  sharp  criticism  of  Rabus  and  his  friends.  A number  of  the  criticisms  have 
been  touched  on  earlier,  but  an  orderly  and  somewhat  fuller  summary  may  be 
helpful. 

Essentially, the root of the problem  seemed to KSZ to be that Rabus et al.  had 
fallen  away from  the teaching and practice of the first reformers, literally  degener-
ated66. This is evident in the personal disrespect  shown by Rabus. Furthermore the 
young  are planting  again  some  of  the  errors  their  eiders  rooted  out  at  such  enor-
mous cost. The disrespect for Zell is demonstrated in Rabus' treatment of KSZ and 
in  the  way  Rabus  has  altered  Matthew's  sacramental  teaching,  prayers,  and prac(cid:173)
tice. Rabus is not honoring Luther, as he thinks, but in fact behaving in some ways 

63  K4r-v.  The  1553  letter  is  fundamentally  an  account  of  KSZ's  self-defense  on two 
fronts:  to Rabus  et al. for  her  ties  with  Schwenckfeld  (3v-7r), and  (at even  greater 
length) how she answered Schwenckfelders who criticized her refusal to break with the 
established Strasbourg church (7v-12r). The picture which emerges is of a person who 
appreciates both sides and therefore refuses  to be compelled to choose either one over 
against the other. 

64  H2v; see e. g., G3r. 
65  A2v, E2r, G2v, H2v, Jlv. See Matthew's objection  to mistreatment of poor (possibly 

Anabaptists): Elv-E2r, and 1553 letter, 4r. 

66  L3v-L4r, L4v-Mlr, M2v, N5r, B4r, Clv, C2r, C2v, C3r, Dlv-D2r, Elr, Elv, J2r, K3r, 

Llv, L2r, etpassim. See 1553 letter, 5r-6v, for similar though less sharp criticism. 

261 

like  Luther's  papal  opponents,  and  changing  Luther's  teachings,  such  as  that  on 
emergency  baptism.  It is notable  that  KSZ  almost  always  appeals  to  Luther's  «first 
and  best»  books,  although  she  also  cites  his  exhortation  to  the  Zells  on  their  visit 
in  1538  «never  to  let  anything  back  in  which  has  been  removed  and  has  no  basis 
in  scripture»67. 

A  second  and  related  criticism  is  Rabus'  intolerance.  Enough  has  been  said 

above  about  this  point. 

Connected  also  with  the  falling  away  from  the  first  teaching  of  the  gospel  is 
Rabus'  fascination  with  Roman  Catholic  practices  and  ideas.  One  clear  focus  for 
this  accusation  is  the  re-introduction  of  various  ceremonies  and  especially  the  use 
of  the  surplice.  Another  is  the  different  interpretation  of  both  the  Lord's  Supper 
and  baptism.  Echoing  fears  expressed  by  her  husband,  KSZ  says  that  Rabus  is 
making  hearing  sermons  and  attending  the  sacraments  new  «works»,  as  he  and  his 
friends  re-introduce  the  idea  of  objective  presence  in  the  elements  of  the  Supper 
and  the  water  of  baptism.  A  third  form  of  «papal»  influence  is  related  to  power  -
clerical  power  and  legalism,  though  KSZ  believes  people  will  not  let  themselves 
be  deprived  of  gospel  liberty68. 

KSZ  sees  Rabus'  secret  departure  from  Strasbourg  as  a kind  of  abandoning  of 
his  flock  which  calls  into  question  his  vocation  (Ordination).  He  is not  behaving  as 
a  good  pastor,  as  St.  Paul  or  as  those  earlier  reformers  of  whom  he  speaks  so  dis-
paragingly.  Rabus  is  in  fact  driving  people  away  and  blaming  this  on  others69. 

The  final  group  of  criticisms  might  be  called  faults  of  character,  the main  ones 
being  pride,  ambition  and  a  want  of  frankness,  and  perhaps  a  certain  greed  for 
material  things.  One  of  the  foci  of  criticism  is  Rabus'  doctorate.  KSZ  considered 
this  a  seeking  after  importance  and  Status  rather  than  a real  concern  for  the  gospel. 
When  he  first  took  his  degree,  Rabus  and  KSZ  discussed  the  matter,  and  the  latter 
rebuked  her  «son»  for  seeking  such  pomp,  foolishness,  and  worldly  honor  when 
they  were  at  the  end  of  the  world  and  the  hangman  was  ready  at  hand.  Rabus  re-
minded  KSZ  that  she  had  approved  of  Luther's  doctorate.  She  answered  that  de-
grees  taken  in the  time  of  ignorance  of  the  gospel  were  the  means  to enter  the  pul-
pit,  but  since  such  degrees  are  no  longer  needed  in  order  to  preach,  all  the  first  re(cid:173)
formers  rejected  such  titles  as  doctor  instead  of  seeking  them.  Perhaps  one  sees 

67  D4r, D4v, F3r, H3r, K4r. H3v, H4r, J2r, H4r-v  et passim.  D4r, Jlr, J2v. L4r, Mlv.  On 
the  question  of  weeds:  Mir,  C3r-v,  Dlv;  KSZ  accuses  Rabus  et al.  of  bringing  back 
weeds  rooted  out by  first  reformers.  The  image  is particularly  interesting  because  the 
parable  of  wheat  and tares  often  was a proof-text  to justify  the killing  of  heretics. See 
S. Schwantes,  L'ivraie  et  les  heretiques,  in:  Conscience  et  liberte  25,  1983, pp. 47-52. 
KSZ never equates weeds with people but repeatedly calls doctrinal errors weeds. 

68  Mir,  C4v  ff,  H4r, J2v. H3v, H4v  (and n. 67), J3r, C3r. M2r.  See  1553 letter,  6v (opus 

opperatus) -  one of KSZ's very rare Latin phrases. 

69  B2v ff.  L4v, N4v. See KSZ's description  of Rabus, E4r-v: a damning  with faint  praise. 
See  1553 letter,  lOv on doctorate -  probably  related to the discussion  which  began  the 
misunderstandings. 

262 

here an over-reaction on KSZ's part. At all events, she notes it as the beginning of 
Problems between Rabus and herseif70. 

Related  to the matter  of  the doctorate  is the  issue of  ecclesiastical  power, es-
pecially  the  ambition  to  be  Superintendent  of  a church.  Although  he  gives  many 
fine reasons  for  going  to  Ulm, KSZ insists that what Rabus  really  wanted  was an 
important  position.  This  part  of  the  indictment  has  a  strongly  humorous,  almost 
slapstick  quality.  Simply  put,  Rabus  says  he  leaves  Strasbourg  because  he  is 
fleeing  the Mass (and  sects). KSZ asks him how he can  say  so, when the Mass is 
also in Ulm. He may  say that in Ulm it is only an old monk  saying Mass in a Cor(cid:173)
ner,  not  preaching.  KSZ  says  that  preaching,  even  by  a  Roman  Catholic,  would 
include some reference  to Christ and the gospel and so would be preferable  to the 
Mass. As for the corner part: in Strasbourg the Mass is indeed in the cathedral, but 
does Rabus think that God is old and doesn't see well, and notices only what hap-
pens in the important places like the cathedral, and not what is done in corners71? 
A  third  point  of  personal  criticism  focuses  on  money.  Here  KSZ  may  well 
have been  somewhat  insensitive,  since  she had  a comfortable  economic  Situation 
(though  she spent her substance freely  on others)72. A number of times, KSZ sug-
gests  that  Rabus  is  more  interested  in  money  than  is  fitting  for  a  minister.  The 
primary  bone of contention, however,  was Rabus' martyrology,  mentioned  above. 
Twice he  asked KSZ for  Information  about her husband  and the beginning  of the 
reform  in  Strasbourg,  to  include  in his  book.  After  her  first  refusal  and  his  rüde 
letter, Rabus wrote to a Strasbourg pastor to ask KSZ again! KSZ refused  to coop-
erate,  because  she  objected  to  having  Matthew  in  a  «geldtbuoch»,  which  she 
thought Rabus was writing more for the money than for  the sake of the church, as 
he  claimed.  According  to  KSZ,  her  non-cooperation  here  was  the  second  reason 
for Rabus' anger with her73. 

A  final  point  might  be  termed  «dissembling».  KSZ  accuses  Rabus  of  not 
speaking  honestly  or  truthfully,  especially  when  he  says  she  lies,  or  when  he 
claims  things  contrary  to  historical  fact  -  though  she  was  there  and  he  was  not. 
One of the funnier  points  is KSZ's demand to know how Rabus can want to have 
her account of Matthew  Zell if he, Rabus, is convinced  she does not teil the truth? 
Does he want to publish the lies of a fool?74 

70  C3v, Glv, K2v-K3r. L4r, M2v, Clv, C2v, C3v, D4v, F3r, Glv. 
7'  C2r, C2v, C3r, K3r; story: C3v-C4r. 
72  G4v-Hlr, Hlv, A2v. See McKee, KSZ. 
73  C2v, C3r, F3r, G3v, K2r. Problem: G3v-G4r, K1 r-v. 
74  G3v, Klv; also G4r. KSZ says that if he knew what happened betöre he was born he 

must be a child wonder (G2r). 

263 

Conclusion 

The foregoing  has not attempted to prove who were heretics and who not. Rather, 
it has  sought  to demonstrate  how  a lay  Christian,  a woman,  argued  in defense  of 
her fellow-believers.  KSZ's  writing  is by  turns persuasive,  humorous, and biting, 
but always the note of passionate conviction is heard, as she asserts and proves (at 
least to her own satisfaction  and that of some contemporaries) that  Schwenckfeld, 
Zwingli, the Baptists, and  she herseif  were not heretics but faithful,  though  sinful, 
followers of the one Savior Christ. 

Prof.  Dr.  Elsie  Anne  McKee,  Princeton  Theological  Seminary,  CN  821,  Princeton, 
NJ 08542-0803 

264 

