«They went out from  us, for  they were not of 

US» 

Zwingli's Judgment of the Early Anabaptists 

by  H.  WAYNE PIPKIN 

We will never know what the Reformation  would have looked like if the  reform-
ers  Luther,  Zwingli  or  Calvin  had  been  able  to  carry  out  their  reforms  without 
controversy.  As  it was, the  theologies  and  the  churches  that  emerged  were  fash-
ioned  within  the  context  of  vigorous  interaction  with  opponents  on  the  left  and 
right. This commonplace judgment  was especially true of the reforming  efforts  of 
Zwingli, whose work was early circumscribed by energetic adversaries. 

Zwingli's  early  program  was  directed  against  the  abuses  of  the  medieval 
Catholic church  in Zürich. He hoped  to carry  out this reform  thoroughly  and con-
sistently  with  the  assistance  of  all  the  evangelical  groups  in  the  city  and  the  re-
gion.  He  expected  that  support  for  his  campaign  would  be  unquestioned.  It  was 
not to be. 

1. 

Not very  long after  the City Council had decided  in January  of  1523 to guarantee 
the formation  of  the Zwinglian  gospel  in Zürich  there  were evidences  of  fissures 
in the Zwinglian  design  for  the  evangelical  cause1. Of particular  importance  was 
the question  of  the payment  of  tithes and  the related  matter  of  usury.  Underlying 
these  issues  were  regional  developments  toward  local  autonomy,  punctuated  by 
evidence  of  anticlericalism,  especially  as  it  emerged  outside  the  city  of  Zürich 
proper.  Anticlerical  sentiments  were used by  Zwingli  himself  in the  development 
of  his  reform,  but  soon  he  found  his  own  ideas  being  used  against  himself  by 
erstwhile  followers  of  his.  Zwingli's  efforts  to  establish  true  religion  within  the 
city  were always carried out with an awareness of the complementary  component 
of civic religion. The one without the other was not even conceivable  in his work. 

There are numerous efforts  to recount the «pre-history» of the Separation of the Täufer 
from Zwingli. The following are useful: /. F. Gerhard Goeters, Die Vorgeschichte des 
Täufertums in Zürich, in: Studien zur Geschichte und Theologie der Reformation, Fest(cid:173)
schrift  für  Ernst  Bizer,  Luise  Abramowski  and  J.  F. G.  Goeters, eds., Neukirchen-
Vluyn 1969 [abbr.: Goeters, Vorgeschichte], pp. 239-281; Robert C. Walton, Zwingli's 
Theocracy, Toronto 1967; Gottfried Wilhelm Locher, Die Zwinglische Reformation im 
Rahmen der europäischen  Kirchengeschichte,  Göttingen  1979 [abbr.: Locher,  Refor(cid:173)
mation], 

279 

He was  soon  to discover  that  some of his more  spirited  followers  were fully  able 
to divorce the two foundational  elements of his reform. 

In  several  outlying  villages  there emerged  in  1523 complaints  over the tithes, 
essentially  a rural  problem2.  Some  of  these  parishes  in  fact  tried  to  decline  their 
payments3. The discord  seemed to have been put to rest by the publication  in July 
of Zwingli's  «Von  göttlicher  und  menschlicher  Gerechtigkeit»4.  Further  manifes-
tations of discontent  in regard  to the use of images broke  out in September  1523, 
perhaps  in response to the preaching  of  Leo Jud5. The radical  preacher  at Höngg, 
Simon  Stumpf,  who had  been  active  in  the  agitation  against  the  tithes,  was  also 
implicated6.  More  certain  measures  were  needed.  The  Second  Disputation  was 
called  by  the  Council  to  discuss  the  question  of  images  and  the  sacrifice  of  the 
mass. 

It  may  well  be  that  with  the  disputation  we  have  the  Coming  together  of 
Zwingli's  rural  and local radical  opponents7.  Certainly  the prominent  role  played 
by  Simon  Stumpf  in both  camps  suggests  this conclusion.  For Zwingli,  however, 
the  significance  of  the  meeting  was  of  more  import  for  the  course  of  the  reform 
itself. If  the First Disputation  in January  undertook  to guarantee  the  Reformation 
in Zürich,  the  Second  insured  the nature  of  that  reform8.  The rejection  of  images 
and the  sacrifice  of  the mass  secured  true religion  for  Zürich;  the manner  of  im-
plementing  the  decisions  of  the  Council  preserved  the  civic  religion  under  the 
leadership  of  the  Council  working  in  tandem  with  the  city  pastors.  It  was  at  this 
point  that he  and  his  radical  followers  began  to  go  separate  ways.  For  while  the 
radicals  could  accept  the search  for  true religion  in Zürich,  they  could  not  accept 
its application  in terms  of civic religion. After  the decision  of the Council to pub-
lish Zwingli's  «Kurze christliche Einleitung»9, and the commitment  to move grad-
ually in an orderly way to bring about the liturgical reform, it was only a matter of 
time  until  the  radicals  would  be  forced  either  to  acquiesce  or  to  express  their 
disagreement publicly. 

There  is every  reason  to believe  that Zwingli  was optimistic  about the  course 
of the reform.  There was little immediate negative response to the deliberations of 
October. The activist Simon Stumpf was first relieved of his post at Höngg in No-

Locher, Reformation, p. 240. 

2 
3  Goeters, Vorgeschichte, pp. 256f. Actensammlung zur Geschichte der Zürcher Refor(cid:173)

8 

9 

280 

mation in den Jahren  1519-1533, ... hrsg. von Emil Egli, Zürich  1879 (Reprint: Nieuw-
koop 1973), Nr. 368 [abbr.: AZürcherRef]. 
ZU 471-525. 

4 
5  AZürcherRef, Nr. 414-416. 
6  AZürcherRef, Nr. 422. 
7 

James M. Stayer, Die Anfänge des schweizerischen Täufertums  im reformierten Kon(cid:173)
gregationali smus, in: Umstrittenes Täufertum, hrsg. von Hans-Jürgen Goertz, 2. Aufl., 
Göttingen  1977, p. 34 [abbr.: Stayer, Anfänge]. 
Locher, Reformation, p. 136 sees the Second Disputation as the «breakthrough» of the 
Zürich Reformation. 
Z II 628-663. 

vember  and  then  finally  exiled  from  Zürich  on  December  231 0. Also  during  the 
previous  week  Conrad  Grebel,  an  early  devoted  follower  of  Zwingli,  had  written 
to  his  brother-in-law,  Joachim  Vadian  in  St Gallen,  a judgment  of  Zwingli  and  the 
reform  that  were  proleptic  for  the  storm  that  was  to follow:  «Uli  neglecta  sententia 
divina  de  non  missando  medium  praescripserunt  prudentia  (scio)  diabolica.  ...  Qui 
Zinlium  ex  officio  pastoris  agere  putat,  credit  vel  dicit,  impie  putat,  credit  et  di(cid:173)
ck»11. 

2. 

The  radical  elements  were  essentially  silent  during  the  first  half  of  1524. We  have 
no  record  of  the  activities  of  Conrad  Grebel  until  September.  Zwingli,  on  the  other 
hand,  if  not  confronted  with  further  immediate  Opposition  from  within  Zürich, 
found  every  reason  to  note  what  was  happening  outside  the  city  proper,  especially 
for  the  implications  these  developments  were  to  have  for  the  relations  of  Zürich  to 
the  Catholic  centers  of  power.  The  tensions  between  Zürich  and  the  confederates 
began  to  mount.  On  January  13, the  confederates  met  in  Lucerne  and  complaints 
were  heard  concerning  the  «bösen  schändlichen  ketzerischen  Handel»  emanating 
from  Zürich,  which  was  described  as the  «Ursprung(sort)  solcher  Irrungen»12. 

Later,  on  January  27  further  reports  of  heretical  activity  were  brought  to  the 
Federal  Diet  concerning  heretical  preaching  and  acts  of  iconoclasm13.  It  was  fur(cid:173)
ther  decided  that  the  various  Orte  should  give  two  representatives  the  power  to 
speak  concerning  the  Lutheran  innovations  with  a  view  to  warning  Zürich  about 
separating  from  the  confederates  because  of  such  views14.  A  list  of  complaints 
was  delivered 
that  described  a  variety  of 
«Lutheran»  activities  in  the  region  that,  by  implication,  were  fully  the  responsibil-
ity  of  Zürich  and  Zwingli,  who  was  mentioned  by  name15.  Clearly,  the  Catholic 
states,  under  the  leadership  especially  of  the  Five  Orte]b,  were  becoming  more  ag(cid:173)
gressive.  On  April  20  it  was  decided  by  all  the  representatives  with  the  exception 
of  Zürich  and  Schaffhausen  that  they  would  remain  with  the  old  faith  and  contin-
ue  preaching  the  gospel  as  it  had  been  accepted  and  protected  by  the  church.  The 

to  the  City  Council 

in  February 

10  AZürcherRef,  Nrs. 441, 463. Further  evidence  that  matters  were  in hand  was the ban-
ishing of  Klaus  Hottinger  and Lorenz  Hochrütiner  from  Zürich  and the  fining  of  Hans 
Ockenfuss,  all for their tearing down of a crucifix  in Stadelhofen  earlier in the Fall. See 
AZürcherRef,  Nrs. 421, 442. 

11  Quellen  zur  Geschichte  der  Täufer  in der  Schweiz, Bd.  1: Zürich, hrsg. von Leonhard 

von Muralt und Walter Schmid, Zürich  1952 [abbr.: QGTS], Nr. 8, p. 8. 

12  Amtliche  Sammlung  der älteren  eidgenössischen  Abschiede  ..., 8 Bde. (vielfach  weiter 

aufgeteilt), var. loc.  1856-1886 [abbr.: EA], vol. 4/1 la, pp. 356-357. 

13  EA4/I  la,p. 360c-d. 
14  EA4/la,p.  361n. 
15  EA  4/la,  pp.  376-379.  Tithes  were  specifically  mentioned  in  addition  to  heretical 

preaching. See p. 377, nr. 6. 
the five  Inner States of the Swiss  Confederation. 

16 

281 

abuses  were  to  be  «bestraft  und  ausgerottet»17,  whether  they  be  from  «Luther, 
Zwingli or others»18. These actions of the confederates,  coupled with the report of 
the execution  of Klaus Hottinger  in March  in Lucerne19, left  little doubt  as to the 
intentions of the Catholic Orte. The pressure on Zürich  was substantial. The Ittin(cid:173)
ger  affair  in  mid-summer  served  to  increase  the  tension.  In  the  minds  of  the 
Catholic Orte, Zürich was fully  responsible  for the iconoclasm  and unrest  at Ittin-
gen.  Zwingli  had  preached  disobedience  to  the  ecclesial  regulations,  argued  for 
clerical marriage  and provided  an ideological  basis  for  the rejection  of  images. It 
was  only  a  short  step from  such  reforming  ideas  to  the  iconoclasm,  looting,  and 
burning  at  Ittingen. At this point  in time Zürich  was  alienated  from  the  Catholic 
states  and  was  powerless  to  prevent  the  execution  of  its  supporters.  It  was  also 
clear that Zwinglian  doctrine was seen as the source of the problem20. Nor should 
one forget the obvious factor  of the peasant unrest that was emerging. Zurich's as-
sumed  complicity  in  the  Ittinger  affair  tended  to  make  the  identification  of 
Zwingli  with the peasants  an easy step for  the confederates21.  The very  Reforma(cid:173)
tion  itself  in Zürich  was threatened.  Against  this backdrop  of  increasing  pressure 
from  the  outside,  the  internal  affairs  of  Zürich  became  critical  during  the  last 
quarter of  1524. 

3. 

The  clear  alienation  between  Zwingli  and  his  radical  followers  was  obvious  in 
September  when  Conrad  Grebel  and  friends  wrote  to  Thomas  Müntzer.  There  is 
no record  of Müntzer's having received the letters and  it is not likely that Zwingli 
saw  them.  Nonetheless,  they  reflect  the  development  of  the  radical  Zwinglians 
and  suggest  how  divergent  the  positions  had  become  between  them  and  their 
mentor.  Grebel  asserted  that not only  had  the church  fallen,  but there  was greater 
error  at present  than there had ever been. The evangelical  preachers  are to blame 
for this. He said, «nach dem wir aber die gschrift  ouch zehand genommen  habend 
und von allerley artiklen besechen, sind wir etwaß bericht worden und habend den 
großen und schädlichen mangel der hirten, ouch unseren erfunden,  daß wir Got nit 
täglich  ernstlich mit stettem  sünftzen  bittend, daß wir uß der Zerstörung alleß göt-

17  EA4/I la,p. 412c. 
18  EA4/la,p.413h. 
19  Heinrich  Bullinger,  Reformationsgeschichte,  nach  dem  Autographon  hrsg. von /.  /. 

Hottinger und H. H.  Vögeli, 3 vols., Frauenfeld  1838-1840 (Register: Zürich  1913; Re(cid:173)
print: Zürich  1985), vol. I, pp. 149-151. Although Hottinger had been exiled from Zü(cid:173)
rich earlier, he was still claimed by Zürich as the first martyr of the reformed faith. 

20  EA4/la, p. 478. 
21  Noteworthy is the following comment concerning a Züricher: «Der jetzige Vogt in den 
freien Aemtern im Aargau, ein Zürcher, befasse sich zu viel mit der lutherischen Neue(cid:173)
rung  [i.e. Zwingli's reformation];  wenn er dahin komme, um zu richten  ... bringe er 
Büchlein mit und predige dem gemeinen Mann  [i.e. the peasants] daraus.» EA 4/la, p. 
377, nr. 8 (Emphasis by the author). 

282 

liehen  wäsens  und  uß menschlichen  grewlen  gefüert  werdind,  in rechten  glouben 
und brüch  Gottes  kummind»22.  He aecused  Zwingli  of  «faltsch  schonen»  and  in-
sisted  that  a very  strict hermeneutic  should  be  appplied  to allow  only  those prac-
tices that are explicitly  commanded  in Scripture. It was  in this letter that the radi-
cals put  into writing for  the first  time that infant  baptism  is false. It is «ein unsin(cid:173)
niger,  gotzlesteriger  grewel  ... wider  alle  gschrift»23.  The assessment  by  the radi-
cals was to surface  again in a short time. In the «Elenchus» Zwingli reported that 
there  were conversations  held between  himself  and  the radicals  on two  Tuesdays 
in December.  They were to be  amicable Conferences,  but they were described  by 
Zwingli  as  taking  place  in  response  to  the  assertion  that  infant  baptism  was  a 
«summam  abominationem»24. 

A new  and  decisively  troublesome  issue  had  now  surfaced  with  the  question 
of  baptism,  one  that  would  eventually  symbolize  all  that  was  different  between 
Zwingli  and  the  radical  Zwinglians.  The  conversations  did  not  aecomplish  the 
desired  reconciliation  and  so  they  were  broken  off  -  because  of  the  anger  and 
hatred that characterized the confrontations,  aecording to Zwingli25 

The literary  activity  of  December  demonstrates  how  lively  the  issues had be-
come  once  again  between  Zwingli  and  his  internal  opponents.  In  a  letter  to  Va-
dian, Grebel  noted  what he had heard  of Zwingli's  activity:  «Der Zwingli  schribt 
vom  gwalt.  Ob er  denselben  kretzen  werd,  weiß  ich nit;  ist  wol  müglich.  Er  der 
Zwingli  schribt  ouch  von  den ufrüereren  oder  ufruor;  darf  wol  unß beträffen.  Sä-
hend zuo; eß wirt etwas bringen»26. 

At  the  same  time  Felix  Manz  was  writing  to  the  City  Council,  apparently 
without  the knowledge  that  Zwingli  was  already  writing  his  treatise  as well27. In 
the  «Protestation  und  Schutzschrift»  Manz  asserted  that  «kindertouff  schlecht, 
falsch  und  auß  dem  endchrist,  dem  bapst  und  seinen  anhengeren  erwachsen  und 
erdacht  sey»28.  He  stated  his  belief  that  Zwingli  had  a  similar  view  of  baptism, 
noting  that  he  was perplexed  that  Zwingli  did  not  declare  himself.  He  asked  the 
Zürich theologian to put his arguments  in writing, which he would then answer in 
writing  since  it  was  not  easy  for  him  to  counter  Zwingli  in  speaking29.  What  is 
noteworthy  about the writing is that Manz  apparently  was addressing  the Council 
as if there were reason to believe that an aecommodation  or conciliation could be 

22  QGTSI, Nr. 14, p. 14. 
23  QGTSI, Nr. 14, p. 18. 
24  Z VI/1 36,  10. In his letter to Lambert of December  16, 1524, Zwingli described the 
discussions as taking place aecording to the norm of love, though marred by the con-
tentiousness of the radicals. Z VIII, Nr. 355. 

25  Z IV 207, 12-18. 
26  QGTSI, Nr. 18, p. 30. 
27  Adolf Fugel,  Tauflehre  und Taufliturgie  bei Huldrych Zwingli, (Diss. theol. Freiburg, 
Schweiz), Bern 1989, (EHS.T 380), [abbr.: Fugel, Tauflehre), p. 208, however, argues 
that Manz wrote in order to get the issue before the Council before Zwingli could write. 

28  QGTSI, Nr. 16, p. 23. 
29  QGTSI, Nr. 16, p. 27. 

283 

achieved. The language  is harsh  in bis condemnation  of the rite of infant  baptism, 
but the tone is appropriate and respectful  without being obsequious. One could not 
teil  from  this  appeal  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  resolving  the  conflict  with 
Zwingli and the Council. 

4. 

Zwingli had already begun  writing «Wer Ursache gebe zu Aufruhr»30.  It was also 
during  this time that Zwingli  wrote  to Strasbourg  and  addressed  for  the first  time 
the  issue  of  baptism  as  a central  issue  in  the  disagreements  between  him  and  his 
followers.  The  tone  is  impatient  and  harsh,  indicating  the  frustration  that  the  re-
former  was experiencing  in his discussions. He developed  evidence  for  what was 
to emerge  as the Zwinglian  view  on baptism, including  circumcision  as the basis 
for  the  New  Testament  rite  of  infant  baptism.  He  seems  to have  been  more  con-
cerned  about  the  tone  of  the  discussions.  He  charged 
the  radicals  with 
«contentiousness  and  stubbornness»31  and  with  «whispering  a  lie  into  the  minds 
of  the  simpleminded»32.  He  concluded  by  saying  that  we  should  not  expect  of 
baptism  what  only  the  grace  of  God  can  do.  If  we  are  to  be  dependent  on  God, 
then  we  do not  need  to  argue  so vehemently  about  an external  sign33.  This  affir-
mation represents  a fundamental  theological  concern of Zwingli. For Zwingli true 
religion  was  theocentric.  Religion  based  on  external  practices  had  long  been  un-
derstood  by him  as false  religion.  Coupled  with this key  element  in his  Reforma(cid:173)
tion  came  a  concern  for  peace.  His  concluding  remark,  «Servet  ecclesiam  suam 
Christus!»34may  be taken to represent more than a formal conclusion to a letter. It 
reflected  his central concern. 

With  the  «Ursache»  Zwingli  entered  decisively  into  the  public  arena  against 
the  radical  Zwinglians. It  is  a treatise  that  revealed  unusual  gifts  of  analysis  and 
understanding35.  An examination  of this pivotal  writing  will illustrate  the  reform-
er's  understanding  of  what  was  at  stake  in  the  confrontation  with  his  alienated 
followers  as he struggled  to keep the Reformation  unified  and secure. He dedicat-
ed  the  treatise  to  Mühlhausen,  but  it  was  clearly  written  for  Zürich  in  a  time  of 

30  Z III 374-469. The preface  is dated December 7 while the treatise itself  is dated De-

cember 26. 

31  Z VIII 269, 19. Also: Z VIII 272, 6. 
32  Z VIII 273, 30-31. 
33  Z VIII 275, 11-15. 
34  Z VIII 278, 5. 
35 

«An analysis of current  discontents  which  showed remarkable  acumen and insight.» 
George R. Potter, Zwingli, Cambridge 1976, p. 160 [abbr.: Potter, Zwingli]. 

284 

difficulty.  Nor  were  the  troubles  to  be  regretted,  for  this  was  God's  way  of  testing 
and proving  that  faith  was  authentic  and  true36. 

Perhaps  the  most  striking  feature  of  the  «Ursache»  is  Zwingli's  description  of 

the  religious  Situation  in  Zürich.  He  divided  those  who  were  in  favor  of  the  Re(cid:173)
formation  into  four  distinct  groups.  The  first  were  those  who  only  support  the 
changes  because  they  hate  and  envy  the  papacy;  they  do  not  have  real  faith.  It  is 
better  that  one  not  opposes  the  papacy  out  of  hate,  but  out  of  love  of  God  and 
neighbor37.  The  second  were  those  who  were  relieved  to  be  free  of  church  laws 
and  regulations.  These  are  not  real  Christians,  who  give  offense  to  those  who 
are38.  The  first  two  groups  were  not  treated  extensively  and  do  not  represent  a 
major  concern  of  the  treatise. 

With  the  next  group  we  reach  a  source  of  considerable  contention  in  Zürich, 
namely,  those  who  brought  hatred  on  the  gospel  by  their  refusal  to  pay  interest, 
tithes  or  other  debts39.  The  section  suggested  just  how  serious  the  question  of 
tithes  had  become  in  the region  of  Zürich.  Zwingli  reiterated  some  concerns  of  his 
earlier  treatise  «Von  göttlicher  und  menschlicher  Gerechtigkeit».  He  treated  the 
issue  somewhat  superficially  in  light  of  the  complexities  of  the  legal  and  practical 
issues  being  reviewed40,  and  eventually  concluded  that,  although  there  were  some 
abuses  involved  in  the  System,  tithes  and  interest  were  to  be  paid  as  they  repre-
sented  legitimate  debts.  With  the  fourth  group  Zwingli  arrived  at  the  question  of 
baptism41.  With  this  treatment  of  those  opponents  who  were  soon  to  be  labelled 
Anabaptists, Zwingli  recognized  the religious  left  wing  in Zürich  that  would  in  the 
very  near  future  break  away  from  the civic  Reformation  to form  their  own  church. 
It  is  clear  that  there  were  several  groups  of  «troublemakers»  that  Zwingli  was 
forced  to  encounter  at  this  crucial  time  in  his  reforming  work.  Given  the  increas-
ing  scrutiny  that  the  city  had  been  under  during  the  previous  year,  it  is  under-
standable  that  Zwingli  was  interested  in  portraying  those  in  the  city  who  were 
likely  to  discredit  the  Reformation  as  essentially  untrue  to  the  gospel  of  Zurich's 
reform. 
the 
only  group,  but  with  this  first  published  analysis  of  the  incipient  Täufer,  it  is  now 
possible  to  see how  Zwingli  developed  arguments  against  them. 

the  proto-Anabaptists  were  not 

transparent 

It 

is  equally 

that 

As  suggested  in  the  letter  to  Strasbourg,  there  are  definite  theological  con(cid:173)

cerns  central  to  the  reformer's  reflections  on  all  the  troublemakers.  Typically,  for 
Zwingli,  as  well  as  other  reformers  including  those  against  whom  he  was  arguing, 
he  began  with  the  affirmation  that he  would  say  nothing  without  basis  in  the  Word 

36 

«Darumb  sollend  uns alle  anfechtungen  gotwolkommen  sin; dann  gott hat  sy  uns zuo-
gesendt, das wir daran unseren glouben erinnerind; er bewärt uns damit.» Z III 375, 28-
30. 

37  Z III 381, 21-383, 28. 
38 
Z III 383, 29 -  387, 14. 
39  Z III 387, 15-403, 20. 
40 
Potter, Zwingli, p. 162. 
41 
ZIII 403, 21-412,  13. 

285 

of  God42.  This  was  the  foundation  of  his  reform.  Those  who  opposed  him  also 
claimed  it as their own. He tacitly recognized  that the radicals also utilized  Scrip(cid:173)
ture. His judgment  was  that they  misused  it and  approached  it in the wrong  way. 
For this  reason  he urged  them,  «Hangend  und  stond dem  götlichen  wort unabge-
lassen by, aber mitt senfftmüetigem  geist»43. It was their spirit that was wrong. 

Not  only  must one  affirm  the  scriptural  basis for  faith  and practice, one must 
be  prepared  to  interpret  it  correctly.  The  hermeneutical  question  was  a  central 
point of contention between Zwingli and the radicals. The theocentric principle  is 
clear. If there are two apparently contradictory passages, then the one that ascribes 
more honor to God was the determinative  one44. Those who denied infant  baptism 
were  ascribing  too much  importance  to  a human  and  external  thing. This  failing 
could  be  corrected  if  they  paid  attention  to  Scripture.  When  there  was  no  clear 
passage in the New Testament, they  should look to the Old to find  a resolution  to 
the difficulties45.  His  willingness  to look back  to  Old  Testament  antecedents  was 
to  be  a  consistent  problem  in  his  dealings  with  the  Anabaptists.  There  is  also  a 
Christocentric  axis  to  Zwingli's  arguments;  the  Christological  focus  of  the  early 
Zwingli  persevered46.  In addition, he developed  a positive theology  of infant  bap(cid:173)
tism47. The many  theological  presuppositions  to be found  in  his  writings  suggest 
the importance of the confrontation  as a theological issue. 

Zwingli's pastoral concern  is also in evidence, a dimension  not always appre-
ciated  in  the  Zürich  reformer.  He  exhorted  the  troublemakers,  «Bedenckend  die 
ding, die zuo friden  dienend und zuo erbuwnuß, das ist: lassend das  Christenvolck 
im  friden  by  dem  süessen  wort  gottes  laben;  unnd  buwend  die  ding,  die  zuo  der 
eer  gottes  dienend;  dann  alle  andre  gebiiw  müessend  nidergebrochen  werden»48. 
In  his  writing,  Zwingli  revealed  concern  for  those  who  would  injure  the  simple 
folk49.  His insistence that the children of Christians are «of God» reflects  a similar 
interest50. 

With  these  theological  and pastoral  concerns  in mind,  it is instructive  to  turn 
to the  descriptions  of  the  radicals  that  flow  from  Zwingli's  pen.  They  follow  the 

«Ein Christ sin ist nit schwetzen von Christo, sonder wandlen, wie er gewandlet hart». 
Z III 407, 18-19. Also: Z III 380, 16 -  381, 20. 

47  The positive arguments concerning baptism, which are beyond the scope of this paper, 

are  covered  in  the  following:  William  Peter Stephens,  The  Theology  of  Huldrych 
Zwingli, Oxford  1986, pp.  194-217; Fugel, Tauflehre,  passim;  Timothy  George,  The 
Presuppositions  of Zwingli's Baptismal Theology, in: Prophet, Pastor, Protestant, the 
Work of Huldrych Zwingli after  Five Hundred Years, E. J. Furcha and H. W. Pipkin 
(eds.), Allison  Park  1984, (Pittsburgh Theological  Monographs, New Series  11), pp. 
71-87. 

42  Zffl  379, 25; 391,2-3. 
43  Z III 407, 14-15. 
44  Z III408, 20-23. 
45  Z III 409, 1-8. 
46 

48  Z III468, 23-26. 
49  Z III406, 29-30. 
50  Z III411,21-22. 

286 

devil,  who  brings  down  the  gospel  and  institutes justification  by  works51. They  are 
too  concemed  about  external  matters,  which  ought  to  be  banished  from  the  hearts 
of  believers52.  Furthermore,  their  very  way  of  conducting  themselves  is  a  source 
of  concern.  They  are  bitter,  melancholic,  too  quarrelsome  and  are  too  unhappy 
with  everyone,  including  themselves53.  The  abundance  of  ad  hominem  arguments 
undoubtedly  grew  out  of  the painful  encounters  that  Zwingli  and  others  were  hav-
ing  with  the  radicals.  The  tension  in  the  city  is  seen  clearly  in  the  reports54.  Of 
particular  interest  is Zwingli's  awareness  of  their  views  about  government  as  well 
as  their  probable  intention  to  establish  another  church55.  Zwingli  saw  them  as  dif-
ficult  to  live  with,  on  the  verge  of  separatism,  and  unwilling  to  accept  the  legiti-
mate  role  of  government  in  protecting  the  church.  These  are  the  arguments  that 
were  used  later  against  the  growing  Anabaptist  movement;  here  they  were  pre-
sented  on  the eve  of  the  actual  Separation. 

It is  not  clear  what  Zwingli  hoped  to  accomplish  with  the  writing  of  «Wer  Ur(cid:173)

sache  gebe  zu  Aufruhr».  It  has  been  suggested  that  it  was  an  attempt  to  bring 
about  reconciliation  with  the  radical  Zwinglians56.  The  tone,  however  moderate  in 
places,  is  hardly  conciliatory.  Given  the  context  of  the  previous  year's  growing 
attacks  from  outside,  it  looks  more  like  an  attempt  to  gain  the  center  ground  and 
hold  it  for  the  Reformation.  On  the  one  hand,  he  has  distanced  himself  success-
fully  from  the  agitators  against  tithes  outside  the  city  and  the  impatient  radicals 
within,  while  continuing  to  define  his  Reformation  over  against  the  medieval 
Catholic  church.  At  this  point  he  seems  to  have  distinguished  between  the  two 
radical  groups.  Locher's  question  is  ultimately  unanswerable,  but  is  provocative: 
«Hat  er  die  Tiefe  der  Kluft  nicht  gesehen  oder  nicht  sehen  wollen?»57  This  much 
is  certain:  the  matter  of  baptism  was  not  considered  to  be  an  «external  matter»  by 
his  earnest  and  disappointed  radical  followers.  Zwingli  claimed  the middle  ground 

willen?» Z III407, 20-21. 

53  Z III405, 8-14. 
54 

55 

Z III 406, 20-24. 

51 
52  Z III 407, 5-9.  Also:  «Was  töubend  ir denn  für  und  für  allein  umb  usserlicher  dingen 

«Aber  einist  zämend  sy  iren  mund  nit  von  lasterred,  vonn  nachred,  von  nyd,  zorn, 
zangg  und hassz, sunder sy sprechend: Welcher  inen glych  thuot, er habe ein  grechten 
spiritum.  Sind  so guot, das  sy nieman  grüetzend,  der  inen begegnet  unnd nitt  gevallt.» 
Z III 404, 14-18. 
«letz  wellend  sy ghein obergheit  haben;  denn  wellend  sy die obergheit  haben; doch  so 
sye keiner ein Christ,  welcher  ein  obrer  sye. Bald  wellend  sy ein eigne kilchen  haben; 
darnach  so ein Oberhand  mit gwalt das predgen  deß euangelii  nit schirmen.»  Z III 404, 
5-9. 

57 

56  Peter J.  Klassen,  Zwingli  and  the  Zürich  Anabaptists,  in: Gottesreich  und  Menschen(cid:173)
reich,  Ernst  Staehelin  zum  80.  Geburtstag,  Basel  1969,  p.  209  [abbr.:  Klassen, 
Zwingli]. 
Locher,  Reformation,  p. 244.  See  also John  H.  Yoder, Täufertum  und  Reformation  in 
der  Schweiz,  Bd.  1: Die  Gespräche  zwischen  Täufern  und  Reformatoren  1523-1538, 
Karlsruhe  1962, (SMGV 6), [abbr.: Yoder, Täufertum], p. 38: «So unterschätzt er nicht 
nur die Wichtigkeit der Fragen, die sie bewegten,,sondern  infolgedessen  auch die Tiefe 
der Kluft, die sie schon von ihm trennte.» 

287 

successfully.  All  that  remained  for  the  left  wing  of  Zürich's  religious  Reformation 
was  Separation. 

5. 

Separation  came  finally  and  definitively  in  January,  1525.  Zwingli  spent  the  next 
several  months  working  closely  with  the  City  Council  to  regain  the  initiative  and 
maintain  control  of  the  religious  life  of  the  city  in  the  face  of  a  lively  religious 
awakening58.  These  folk  were  not  just  troublemakers.  They  appeared  to  be  un-
dermining  Zwingli's  work  and  were  potentially  stealing  the  initiative  for  reform  in 
Zürich.  Not  only  were  they  reforming  baptismal  practice  in  Zürich,  precisely  at 
the  time  that  Zwingli  was  having  difficulty  in  winning  agreement  from  the  City 
Council  for  an  evangelical  Lord's  Supper,  the  Täufer  were  celebrating  the  Supper 
in  their  homes  and  elsewhere,  under  the  leadership  of  obviously  non-ordained  per(cid:173)
sons59.  Thus  it  looked  as  if  a  non-official  church  was  Coming  into  existence.  Fur(cid:173)
ther,  the  reports  were  sufficient  to  suggest  that  this  church  was  not  merely  a  few 
disgruntled,  disenchanted  troublemakers,  but  a mass  movement60.  It  was  not  limit(cid:173)
ed  to  Zürich.  Kessler  reported  that  in  St.  Gallen  there  were  as many  as  800  Täufer 
and  that  when  Zwingli  heard  that  the  town  was  overrun  by  Anabaptists  he  wrote 
his book  «Von  der  Taufe,  von  der  Wiedertaufe  und  von  der  Kindertaufe»61. 

The  Anabaptist  movement  as  such  was  four  months  old  when  Zwingli  once 
again  took  pen  in  hand  to  attack  them.  He  developed  both  positive  and  negative 
arguments  in  his  efforts  to  defeat  them.  He  laid  a  theological  foundation  from 
which  to  establish  the  inadequacies  of  their  endeavors  combined  with  a critique  of 
their  impact  on  society. 

Several  scholars have chronicled  the birth  of the Anabaptists  in Zürich. The  following 
provide  both  surveys  and  interpretations  of  salient  features  of  the  early  time  of  the 
Anabaptists:  Fritz  Blanke,  Brüder  in  Christo,  die  Geschichte  der  ältesten  Täuferge(cid:173)
meinde  (Zollikon  1525), Zürich  1955; George Huntston  Williams, The Radical  Refor(cid:173)
mation, Philadelphia  1962; Klassen, Zwingli, passim;  Stayer,  Anfänge,  passim; Martin 
Haas,  Der Weg der Täufer  in die Absonderung,  in: Umstrittenes  Täufertum,  hrsg. von 
Hans-Jürgen  Goertz, 2. Aufl.,  Göttingen  1977, pp. 50-78  [abbr.: Stayer, Anfänge]; Yo-
der, Täufertum,  passim. 
There were numerous reports concerning the celebration  of the Supper when the Täufer 
were together. E.g. see: QGTS I, Nrs. 42b, 50, 55, 56. The Council forbade  Felix Manz 
not  only  to  conduct  baptisms,  but  also  «brot  brechen  und  derglychen  handlungen». 
QGTS I, Nr. 42c, p. 50. 
Numerous  reports  as  to  the  numbers  of  persons  involved  were  given.  Twenty-six 
names  are  listed  on  February  8 as being  under  arrest,  but  does  not  include  Manz  and 
Blaurock  as well  as  other names  that  surface  in the  depositions  found  in  QGTS. John 
H. Yoder suggests that eighty persons were baptized  in three weeks; Yoder,  Täufertum, 
p. 47. 
Johannes  Kesslers  Sabbata,  mit  kleineren  Schriften  und  Briefen,  Emil Egli  and Rudolf 
Schock (eds.), St. Gallen  1902, pp.  148f. 

288 

Zwingli's  fundamental  theological  concern  was  theocentric.  The  Anabaptists' 
unwillingness  to  admit children  to baptism  was  evidence  that they  limit  God,  for 
the Spirit  works  wherever God  intends or wills. «Ich wil got lassen würcken,  wie 
und wen er wil»62. Furthermore, external practices have been abolished by  Christ. 
No external  thing  can  make us righteous63. These  affirmations  were the center of 
Zwingli's  understanding  of Reformation.  The Täufer  were wrong  theologically. If 
one  acts  on  the basis  of  wrong  theology,  the result  will  be  the  destruction  of  the 
church64.  Similarly,  their  understanding  of  Scripture  was defective  and  it was  for 
this reason that they practiced rebaptism65. The ecclesiological issue is also promi(cid:173)
nent in Zwingli's analysis. The Täufer  were attempting to establish a new  church, 
for  in  rebaptizing  they  formed  a  sect66.  Indeed,  they  recognized  no  church  but 
their own67. The disruption  and contention they brought will destroy the church68. 
Their  actions  were  carried  out  without  the  authorization  of  the  church  and  were 
contrary to the way that innovations are properly instituted69. By their very actions 
they were demonstrating  that what they  were doing was not done by the authority 
of the church. 

Zwingli  also undertook  to portray  the  shortcomings  of  the Täufer  in terms of 
their  actions.  They  were  guilty  of  shattering  the  peace,  creating  unrest,  and  de-
stroying  charity70.  Precisely  at  the  time  that  Zürich  feit  itself  surrounded  by 
neighbors who threatened to bring to an end the Reformation  in the city, there ap-
peared  a  contentious  group  who  undercut  the  unity  of  the  church.  Much  of  the 
criticism directed against the Täufer  suggests how much disruption and dissension 
they  must  have caused  within  the  city  by  the  manner  in which  they  voiced  their 
Opposition. They  were accused  of inflammatory  rhetoric. Anyone who  contradict-
ed them they  called  a heretic  and the antichrist71. Zwingli complained  that he had 
been defamed  as a heretic  to the  simple folk72.  Clearly, he suffered  from  the per(cid:173)
sonal  attacks made on him. This must have been particularly  piercing  to Zwingli, 
for  many  of  these  character  assassins  were  at  one  time  among  his  most  ardent 

62  Z IV 242, 26. 
63  Z IV 216, 28-29. 
64  Z IV 254, 25-31. 
65  They especially misread the Old Testament, Z IV 212, 5-6. They fail to understand the 
scriptural origins of baptism, Z IV 258, 4-5. They practice rebaptism because they do 
not understand Acts 19, Z IV 268, 30-32. 

«Wenn man dasselb anheben wil, sol der bischoff  oder prophet die kilchen vorhin wol 
leren, und demnach der gemeind das urteil und erloubnus lassen.» Z IV 256, 9-11. 

66  ZIV 206, 24 -  207, 2, Z IV 246, 7-8. 
67  Z IV 252, 13-14. 
68  ZIV 216, 11-12. 
69 

70  Z IV 206, 19-20; 216, 7-9; 285, 1-3. 
71  ZIV 206, 20-21. 
72  Z IV 208, 7-8. 

289 

followers.  Not  only  that,  there  were  Outsiders  such  as  Georg  Blaurock  of  Chur 
who came into the region and attacked Zwingli with shameful  names73. 

Zwingli  himself  was  not  unwilling  to  engage  in  name  calling.  He  character-
ized  the  Täufer  as  guilty  of  heresy,  sectarianism  and  partisanship74.  While  pre-
tending  humility  they  indulge  in  dishonorable  talk  with  hateful  words75.  Their 
claims  to  live  sinless  lives  are refuted  by  their  «nydisch  reden,  liegen,  uffruoren, 
schmähen,  lestren»76. This  sampling  of Zwingli's  portrayal  of  the Täufer  in  terms 
of personal polemic  illustrates  the sense of betrayal he feit.  His citation  of  1 John 
is especially poignant: «Darumb sy warlich die sind, von denen  1 Jo.2. stat: 

<Sy sind von uns ußgangen; dan  sy warend nit uß uns. Dann wärind  sy by uns 
bliben>»77. It was a point  at which Zwingli and Zürich  were vulnerable, for oppo-
nents outside the region  were inclined to blame Zwingli for  the rise of the  Täufer. 
This helps account for his vigorous attempts to separate himself from  them. 

Zwingli  also  accused  the  Täufer  of  a  deficient  understanding  of  church  hi-
story. They  argued that infant  baptism began with Pope Nicholas II, which the re-
former dismissed with proof that it is certain that Augustine defended  the practice, 
and this because it was an apostolic practice78. 

The pastoral  concern  of  Zwingli  again emerged  in his  critique.  Zwingli  inti-
mated that infant  baptism  Stands to guarantee that Christian doctrine will be prop-
erly taught and that children  will be instructed from  youth on by their parents  in a 
Christian  way, and  if the parents  fail  to do this, the godparents  will insure proper 
instruction79.  The pastor  was quite  certain  that the Anabaptist  practice of  waiting 
until the age of accountability  would guarantee that many young people would be 
lost to the church. 

The treatise itself  indicates how great the stress was for Zwingli and Zürich. It 
is long  and  disorganized.  Zwingli  knew  this. In  a letter  to Vadian  on  May  28 he 
noted  that the treatise  was tedious80. In his  «Predigtamt»  he noted  that due to the 
lack of time he had not been able to reread it; consequently there were some errors 
in  it81.  The  writing  not  only  shows  signs  of  haste,  but  signs  of  disorganization. 
There are numerous passages where the train of thought  is broken by an anecdote 

73 

«Und in sunderheit der [i.e. Blaurock], so mich offenlich  ußgesungen und geschrüwen 
hart mit grossem wüeten und unbescheidenheit, ich sye ein kätzer, ein mörder, ein dieb, 
der war Antchrist, velsche die gschrifft  wirs denn der bapst ye geton hab.» Z IV 322, 
27 -  323, 2. 

74  Z IV 206, 22-24. 
75  Z IV 210, 6-7 and 20-23. 
76  Z IV 230, 24-25. 
77  Z IV 208, 24-26. 
78  Z IV 278, 23-279, 15. 
79  ZIV331,  17-332,28. 
80  Z VIII 331, 4. 
81  Z IV 433, 13-17. 

290 

or  a digression,  which  suggests  that  the  Täufer  affair  had  indeed  come  to  weigh 
heavy in Zwingli's mind, so much so that his ability to concentrate was broken82. 

6. 

Soon  after  Publishing  «Von  der  Taufe»  Zwingli  published  another  treatise  that 
addressed  the  Täufer  from  an  ecclesiological  point  of  view:  «Von  dem  Predigt(cid:173)
amt»83. A lengthy  analysis is not necessary. Most of the arguments of the baptism 
book are reiterated  here, but especially  those that reflect  the impact  of  the  Täufer 
on the church. The main theme  of «Predigtamt»  is simple enough:  the Täufer  are 
self-appointed  apostles  who act, baptize, preach  and carry out ecclesiastical  func-
tions without proper  authority. They  are not commissioned  by the church  and act 
without  the  approval  of  a bishop  or parish  congregation84.  It  is  a  simple  enough 
argument, one that clearly makes the point that Zwingli's reform  is the official  Re(cid:173)
formation  and  that  of  the  Täufer  is  unofficial,  one  that  in  the  final  analysis  will 
härm the godly, quiet Christians of the region. It is interesting to note that Zwingli 
clearly  identified  the  Anabaptists  with  the  tithes  agitators,  as  he  had  not  in  De-
cember85. 

What  conclusions  may  now  be drawn  about  Zwingli's judgments  of  the early 

Anabaptists? 

First, the Anabaptists  started  to attract  a following  as well as unfavorable  no-
tice  when  the  Reformation  was  not  yet  completely  established.  Precisely  at  the 
time that the radical  Zwinglians  were approaching  Separation,  the Catholic  states 
were paying more attention to the Situation of Zürich  in their midst. This made the 
question of unity within Zürich more urgent from  the perspective of the  reformer. 
Second,  the  process  of  Separation  was  spread  out  over  a period  of  fifteen  to 
eighteen  months.  It  is  possible  to  define  the  moment  of  Separation  as  January 
1525, but the radicals, and probably Zwingli, were attempting to resolve the issues 
with conciliation until that time. 

Third,  the  two radical  groups  in the Zürich  region,  that  is, the rural  group of 
tithes agitators  and the internal  group of religious  agitators  probably  were related 
early on, but were identified  as one group by Zwingli only in May, 1525. 

82  E.g., see the following: Z IV 256, 27; 279, 15ff;  303, 12-13; 307, 11-12; 313,  22-27; 

322, 27ff; 333, 9-10. 

83  Z IV 382-433. 
84 

«Der iro lätzen wyß gibt kundtschafft,  das sy so vil wolgelerter, wyser menner, so vil 
gotzförchtiger,  frommer  menschen  verstand  und  wamung  verachtet,  und  wider  alle 
gründ des göttlichen Wortes den widertouff  angehebt und sich selbs für  apostel ufge-
worffen  habend, und in eyn yeder kilchöre, da glych der bischoff  und schaaff  glöubig 
sind, den widertouff  anhebend one verwilligung oder besuochenn der gmeynd.» Z IV 
386, 10-16. 

85  Z IV 388,  10. 

291 

Fourth,  personal  factors  should  not  be  overlooked.  Zürich  was  a  small  city. 
The  unrest  created  by  criticism  of  the  government  and  the  Reformation  took  its 
toll on Zwingli himself  and no doubt hardened his responses. 

Fifth,  the  Anabaptists  early  accepted  the  efforts  of  Zwingli  to  establish  true 
religion  within  Zürich, but did not agree  with his complementary  commitment  to 
civic  religion.  This  led  to  their  disenchantment  with  Zwingli.  The  roots  of  the 
Anabaptist  movement  are to be found  within  Zürich  and  Zwingli's  reforming  ef(cid:173)
forts.  The  failure  of  Zwingli  to  win  them  over  to  his  comprehensive  view  of re(cid:173)
form  eventually  led him to disassociate  himself  from  them. Zwingli  also believed 
that  there  were  theological  as  well  as  ecclesiological  differences  between  them. 
For all these reasons he proclaimed,  «They went out from  us, for they were not of 
us.» 

Prof. Dr. H. Wayne Pipkin, Associated Mennonite Biblical Seminaries, 3003 Benham Ave(cid:173)
nue, Elkhart, IN 46517-1999 

292 

