«Welcher  nit gloubt  der ist schon  verdampt»: 

Heinrich  Bullinger  and  the 

Spirituality  of the  Last  Judgement 

VON  BRUCE  GORDON 

For  19 March  1555 Bullinger noted in his diary <finivi evangelium  Mattheaei 
pro  concione  publica>,  marking  the  end  of  two  years  of  lectio  continua 
preaching of the Gospel at the Sunday morning Service in the  Grossmünster.' 
Such was  Bullinger's  industry  that  the  following  week  (24 March)  he  com-
pleted  his  tour  through  Paul's  first  letter  to  the  Corinthians  -  the  biblical 
book  for  the  Friday  sermons  -  begun  in  February/March  1554.  Bullinger's 
heady  pace  had  been  sustained  for  nearly  twenty-five  years,  and  it was  his 
regulär practice to preach three (in the early years up to six!) times a week on 
Tuesdays,  Fridays  and  Sundays.2  In  addition  to  his  sermons  for  the  early 
morning  Services, Bullinger  also preached  on  the  principal  days  of  the  Re-
formed  church  year  (Christmas, Easter,  Pentecost)  and  the patronal  festival 
of  Felix  and  Regula  in  September,  leading  Fritz  Büsser  to  estimate  that  be-
tween  7,000  and  7,500  sermons  were  delivered  in  Zürich  by  Zwingli's  suc-
cessor  during  his  forty-four  years  as  head  of  the  church.3  These  sermons 
formed  the  crucial  artery  of  Bullinger's  activity  in  Zürich,  feeding  all of  his 
other intellectual, ecclesiastical, and political activities, with most of the ideas 
first  expressed  in the  context  of worship  Services recycled  to  fit  a variety  of 
contexts. The Word of God as the foundation  for all human activity -  this was 
as  Bullinger  believed  it  should  be;  yet,  such  a  seemingly  straightforward 
premise was in fact the basis of a deeply complex set of issues. We still  know 
far  too little about  how  Bullinger worked  in formulating  and  disseminating 
his ideas, nor have we yet penetrated  the dense web of interrelationships  be-
tween his sermons and writings on the one hand, and, on the other, the wider 
orbit of his activities as head of a large church which consisted of more than a 
hundred  urban  and  rural  parishes.4  The  large  corpus  of  surviving  sermons 

2 

1  Heinrich  Bullinger Diarium  (Annales vitae) der Jahre  1504-1574. Ed. Emil Egli, Basle 1904, 
p. 47. On  Bullinger's  preaching  see Fritz  Büsser, <Bullinger -  Der  Predigen: in Wurzeln  der 
Reformation  in Zürich, ed. by Fritz Büsser, Leiden  1985,143-158. 
The routine  of Services in Zürich during Bullinger's time was well established: three Services 
on Sunday in the Grossmünster, with one in Fraumünster, St Peter's, and the  Predigerkirche, 
while on weekdays there was always one Service in the Grossmünster  and in one of the other 
city  churches.  In  the  Grossmünster  Bullinger  headed  a team  of  five  ministers,  who  would 
share the Services. Büsser, <Bullinger -  Der Prediger>, p. 143. 
Ibid. 

3 
4  The  literature  on  Bullinger  is  still  rather  underdeveloped.  For  an  overview  of  his  life  and 
thought, see Bruce Gordon,  Heinrich Bullinger, in: The Reformation  Theologians. An  Intro-

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

29 

Bruce  Gordon 

forms  a map of Bullinger's mental world; they provide a narrative  structure, 
shaped  by his language of  biblical exposition, for  the confusing  array  of  do-
mestic  and  international  matters  in which  he found  himself  entangled.  Bul-
linger  spoke  to  the  people  of  Zürich  in  sermons  for  almost  fifty  years,  ex-
plaining the world  in terms of scripture by choosing what he regarded  as the 
appropriate text for  particular  situations. It was an intimate and complex re-
lationship between the reformer  and his adopted city, and there is much work 
to  be  done  on  the  subject,  but  in  this  essay  I  shall  attempt  to  open  the  dis-
cussion through  an examination  of  one set of sermons which were  delivered 
at a crucial  moment. 

This brings us back to the spring of  1555. Shortly before he concluded  his 
preaching  on Matthew,  Bullinger published  two  sermons  based  on  chapters 
24 and  25 of  the  Gospel  under  the  title Das Jüngste  Gericht.  The  subject  of 
these  two  sermons  was  Christ's  own  words  on  the  final  judgement  of  hu-
manity,  and  Das Jüngste  Gericht  appeared  in  an  octavo  volume  from  the 
press  of  Christoff  Froschauer  sometime  in  January,  bound  together  with 
John  Calvin's  Defensio  sanae  et  orthodoxae  doctrinae.h  The  latter,  printed 
simultaneously  in  Zürich  and  Geneva, was  Calvin's  defence  of  Swiss  theol-
ogy  against  the  attacks  of Joachim  Westphal,  and  the  joining  at  the  hip  of 
these  two  works,  despite  obvious  differences  of  genre  and  language,  was 
surely a public display of unity by two men who were never especially close.6 
And the conjunction  was not accidental, for  Bullinger had been reading  Cal(cid:173)
vin's Defensio  as he was writing Das Jüngste  Gericht.  The French  reformer's 
work  had  found  favour  in Zürich, although  Bullinger,  still deeply  wounded 
by years of bitter conflict,  suggested that Calvin had not been severe  enough 
on  Luther.7  For  over  ten years  Bullinger  and  Calvin  had  been  co-operating 
closely  on  various  fronts,  a subject  which  has  received  considerable  atten(cid:173)
tion,  but  what  interests  us  here  are  the  thematic  connections  between  the 

duction  to  Theology  in  the  Early  Modern  Period,  ed.  by  Carter  Lindberg,  Oxford  2002, 
170-183. On  his involvement  with  the Zürich  Council, see Hans Ulrich Bächtold,  Bullinger 
vor dem  Rat. Zur  Gestaltung und  Verwaltung  des Zürcher  Staatswesens  in den Jahren  1531 
bis 1575, Bern 1982 (ZBRG  12). On Bullinger and the ministry, see Pamela Biel,  Doorkeepers 
at the House  of  Righteousness.  Heinrich  Bullinger  and  the  Zürich  Clergy  1535-1575, Bern 
1991 (ZBRG  15). On  Bullinger  and  the clergy  of  Zürich,  see Bruce Gordon,  Clerical  Disci-
pline and  the Rural  Reformation.  The Synod  in Zürich,  1532-1580, Bern  1992 (ZBRG  16). 

5  Diarium, p. 47. 
6  Bernard  Cottret,  <Pour une semiotique de la Reforme:  Le Consensus Tigurinus  (1549) et La 
Breve Resolution.. ..(1555) de Calvin, in: AESC 39, 1984, 265-284. Also, Uwe Plath,  Calvin 
und Basel in den Jahren  1552-1556, Zürich  1974, 174-192. 

7  W. de  Greef, The  Writings  of John  Calvin.  An  Introductory  Guide,  trans.  Lyle  D.  Bierma 
Grand  Rapids,  1993,190-193. Also j o s e ph  N  Tylenda,  The Calvin-Westphal Exchange. The 
Genesis  of  Calvin's  Treatise  against  Westphal,  in:  Calvin  Theological  Journal  9,  1974, 
182-209. 

30 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger  and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

public  polemics  of  this  prominent  double  act  and  the  development  of  Bul(cid:173)
linger's thought during the crucial decade of the 1550s, when he produced his 
most  important  theological  and pastoral works.8 Das Jüngste  Gericht  off ers 
us  a window  on  both  Bullinger's  method  of  working  and  how  his  biblical 
exegesis was integral to his perception  of contemporary  events. 

Das Jüngste  Gericht 

Das Jüngste  Gericht''  is typical of a type of text which appeared with increas-
ing frequency  during the second half  of Bullinger's tenure as head of the  Zü(cid:173)
rich church: the vernacular sermon or tract printed for  literate lay people and 
clergy.10 All of these works were sparks from  the anvil of his preaching, based 
on the book of the Bible he was currently expositing, and responding to  con(cid:173)
temporary religious controversies. They were central to the vast flow of pas(cid:173)
toral  literature  which  had  its  source  in  Bullinger's  circle  of  churchmen  and 
printers, who  saw themselves  as responsible  for  the  dissemination  of  God's 
word  in  a form  digestible  by  the  wider  public. The  emphasis  of  the  works 
was  invariably  upon  the  practical  Christian  life,  didactic  tracts  intended  to 
meet  an  audience  not  entirely  persuaded  by  or  understanding  of  the  new 
faith,  and  they  employed  Augustine's  practice  of  questions  and  answers. 
Within their own terms of reference these works were highly consistent, em-
phasising  the  same points  repeatedly,  but  one  is Struck  by  the  intentionally 
narrow  ränge of topics  treated. 

The very form of Das Jüngste  Gericht,  with its two sermons, is itself an ar-
ticulation  of  its principal  argument  -  the  centrality  of  judgement  to  Chris-
tianity. Christ  on  the last  day will  separate  humanity  into  two  groups  -  the 

8  On  Bullinger  and  Calvin's  relationship, see Bruce  Gordon,  Calvin  and  the  Swiss  Reformed 
Churches, in: Calvinism in Europe  1540-1620, ed. by Andrew Pettegree,  Alastair Duke,  and 
Gillian Lewis,  Cambridge  1994, 78. 

9  Das Jüngste Gericht Vnsers Herren Christi wie er das werde halten über all waelt am lesten tag 
vß dem heiligen Euangelio Matthei am 25. Capit mit zweyen Predigen vßgeleget zuo  Zürych 
von  Heinrychen  Bullingern  ...  Zu  Zürych  by  Christoffel  Froschouer  M.  D.  L.V., Joachim 
Staedtke,  Heinrich  Bullinger  Bibliographie  (HBBibl  I), (Zürich,  1972), n. 281, pp. 135-136. 
10  Examples  of  other  such works  are: <Von rechter  Hilfe  und  Erretung  in Nöten>  (1552), <Von 
wahrem  beständigen  Glauben>  (1552),  <Von  der  Verklärung  Christi>  (1552),  <Von  rechter 
Buße oder Besserung des sündigen Menschern (1553), <Vom heiligen Nachtmah  (1553), <Vom 
Heil  der  Gläubigem  (1555),  <Das Jüngste  Gerichte  (1555),  «Bericht,  wie  die  Verfolgen  an(cid:173)
tworten  sollen>  (1559),  <Von  der  Bekerung  des  Menschen  zu  Gott>  (1569),  «Wider  die 
schwarzen  Künste (1570), <Von höchster Freud und  größten  Leid des jüngsten Tages> (1572), 
<Von der schweren Verfolgung der christlichen Kirchen» (1573), «Predigten über den 130. Und 
133 Psalm> (1574). On  «Wider die schwarzen  Künste», see Bruce Gordon  »God  killed Saul»: 
Heinrich  Bullinger  on  the  Power  of  the Devil, in: Demons, Vampires  and Werewolves. The 
Revenant in European  Culture, ed. by Kathryn Edwards,  Kirksville, ML, 2002, 236-261. 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

31 

Bruce  Gordon 

saved  and the damned. The two  sermons, therefore,  address judgement,  sal-
vation, and damnation -  the great divide between God's chosen and  rejected. 
Human life is given meaning through the Separation, or purgation, of what is 
true from  what is false. This is an Augustinian  theme very much  at the  heart 
of Zwingli's theology and reform programme with constant use of the binary 
language  of  spirit/flesh,  purity/impurity,  created/uncreated  etc."  The  first 
sermon  contains  the  good  news  as Bullinger  offers  comfort  to  the  faithful, 
assuring them that they will survive the final day. The sermon has  something 
of  the  tone  of  a medieval ars moriendi  in which  Bullinger  seeks to  allay  the 
fears of men and women  about death with the assurance that Christ will save 
them.  The  second  sermon,  however,  finds  Bullinger  in  a  more  irritable, 
prophetic mood  as he conjures  up the füll  horror of Christ's judgement  with 
an angry enumeration and denunciation of those who can expect to be turned 
away by the judge and consumed  in the  conflagration.n 

As with  all of Bullinger's pastoral works, the sermons  operate on  various 
levels and speak to different  audiences.13 Given the length of the two  sermons 
-  the octavo volume runs to over a hundred pages -  it is likely that the printed 
text  is  an  amalgam  of  several  sermons  delivered  on  Matthew  24 and  25, al-
though there is no evidence that the text conveys anything which would  not 
have  been  preached  from  the  pulpit.  In  a  style  typical  of  his  vernacular 
works, Bullinger avoids reference to patristic (with the exception of one quo-
tation from Augustine) or contemporary authors in favour of densely packed 
biblical  quotations  intended  to  demonstrate  the clarity  and  harmony  of  the 
divine message. The  strict biblicism, however, is shaped  by  a clear  rhetorical 
strategy which  opens with  Bullinger's  intention  to convey the drama of  that 
final day. Christ will descend from  the clouds and all humanity, the living and 
the dead, will  be raised  up  before  him  to be judged.  Christ  will separate  the 
faithful  from  the damned, drawing the former  to his right and the latter to his 
left.  Speaking first  to those on his right he will assure them of their  salvation 
and send them on their way to life in the presence of God, while the  damned 
remain  to  hear  his condemnation  and  judgement.  Every  aspect  of  the  scene 
for  Bullinger is redolent with meaning, as we shall see, and in the sermons  he 
seeks to lead his listeners/readers  through  the  event. 

11  On  this see Peter Stephens,  The Theology  of Huldrych  Zwingli, Oxford  1986, 142-146. 
12  Not surprisingly, given the shortness of his time in Zürich, Zwingli wrote little about the Last 
Judgement and the Book of Revelation figures only peripherally in his writings. The principal 
contemporary  influences  on  Bullinger's  writing  on  the  Last Judgement  were  his  colleagues 
Leo Jud and Theodor Bibliander. See Irena Backus, Reformation Readings of the Apocalypse. 
Geneva, Zürich, and Wittenberg, Oxford  2000. 

13  There is an extremely useful  discussion  of  rhetorical  strategies  in preaching  in Jay  Goodale, 
Pastors,  Privation,  and  the  Process  of  Reformation  in  Saxony,  in:  The  Sixteenth  Century 
Journal, 33, 2002, 71-92. 

32 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich Bullinger and the Spirituality of the Last Judgement 

There  is  a dualism  in  Bullinger's  rhetorical  purpose  as he  attempts  to  bal-
ance  comfort  with  alarm.  The  pastoral  intent  cannot  be  to  p r o m o te  anxiety, 
for,  as Bullinger  remarks, it is out  of  fear  that  many  have asked  him  about  the 
Last  Judgement.  The  proper  pastoral  use  of  fear  is  to  raise  the  people  to  a 
State  of  alertness  (wachbarkeit),  which  is  for  Bullinger  both  a  moral  and 
spiritual  condition.  <Wachbarkeit>  is  a  harmonious  balance  of  the  inner  and 
outer  person  distinguished  by  prayer  and  affective  devotion,  which  are  the 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  by  a  life  of  moral  rectitude.  The  person  waiting  for 
Christ  must  not  be  passive  before  the  prospect  of  judgement,  for  <wachbar-
keit> involves  all the  senses, which  must  not  only  be  alert for  signs  of  the  end, 
but  should  be  active  in  fulfilling  God's  commandment  of  love.  This  watch-
fulness  for  the  Last  Judge  is  imperative  because  the  people  are  living  in  the 
last  days, facing  imminent  judgement.14 

The  dread  reality  of  a final  judgement  is indeed  the  central  message  of  the 
sermons  but  we  need  to  distinguish  the  different  realities  Bullinger  is  ad-
dressing;  alongside  the  literal/historical  reading  of  the  text  he  is also  offering 
a  form  of  realised  eschatology,  whereby  the  Last  Judgement  serves  as  a 
powerful  metaphor  in  Zürich  theology  for  the  fundamental  polarities  in  cre-
ation  and  human  nature.  The  Last  Judgement  is  both  a  future  event  and  a 
present  reality  borne  out  in  the  lives  of  the  people.  The  struggle  between 
good  and  evil culminates with the  divine judgement,  but  that  event  is the  final 
resolution  of  what  already  exists  in  the  lives  of  men  and  women,  w ho  will  be 
measured  according  to  their  own  judgements.  Thus  the  Last  Judgement  is 
not  an  external, alien justice  imposed  u p on  the people, but  a füll  revelation  of 
their true nature. Those w ho  have chosen  Christ  can expect  to  be saved  by  his 
righteousness,  just  as  the  evil,  execrable  works  of  the  ungodly  will  be  ex-
posed  in  all  their  hideousness.  Judgement  is  a  mirror  held  up  to  the  naked 
soul;  it  is  about  the  revelation  of  the  true  person.  In  the  eighty-fifth  sermon 
on  the  Book  of  Revelation  we  find  this  idea  expressed: 

In the treatise of the last judgement  is sene the end of al menne, life and death, fel-
icitie  and  miserie, payne  or  torment,  and  unspeakable  and  heavenly  rewarde.  He 
that  remembereth  these  things  well  abhoreth  wickedness,  and  walketh  in  holy 
feare  before  God.15 

It  is  judgement  which  gives  meaning  to  the  polarities  of  human  existence 
(life/death,  felicity/misery  etc) and  the  spiritual  key, in true  Zürich  fashion,  is 
m e m o ry  (<he that  remembreth>),  the  ability  to  recall  what  G od  has  revealed 
to  humanity  and  apply  it  in  one's  life. Bullinger  formulates  his  teaching  with 
a nod  to  Augustine,  though  we  need  much  more  research  in  order  to  feel  the 

fol. Air 

14 
15  Hundred Sermons, 575. 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

33 

Bruce  Gordon 

füll  texture  of  his  argument.  The  Christian  life  requires  an  individual  to  be 
able to sort true images, or signs, from  false ones, to be able to hear the Word 
of  God  and discern and retain its message. Memory  of  God's Word  is divine 
illumination  and  it is through  the power  of  the  Spirit  that  men  and  women 
remain faithfui  to God and obey His commandments; it is both a gift and that 
which ultimately separates the sheep from  the goats on the last day. Bulling-
er's  development  of  Zwinglian  spirituality  is through  his  application  of  the 
Zwinglian  Eucharist  language  of  memoria  to  the  Christian  life.16  The  Eu-
charist,  so  noisily  and  harmfully  disputed  by  the  Protestant  reformers,  is 
treated in these sermons in terms of Bullinger's pastoral vocabulary,  allowing 
us to see that the dominant  theological  and political question was also at the 
heart  of the spirituality  of the Zürich  reformer. 

Contexts 

Bullinger's message about the end of time was delivered in the particular  set-
ting  of  profound  theological  and  social  dislocation  in  Zürich  during  the 
1550s. The preacher in the Grossmünster  drew two themes from  his  biblical 
material to address these issues; first was the topic of good works; the second, 
already briefly  mentioned, was the Eucharist. The events to which they  per-
tained were the controversy  over poor relief  and the Westphal case as part of 
the ongoing dispute with the German  Lutherans. These two themes are care-
fully  woven  into a treatment  of the Last Judgement  in order  to establish  the 
fundamental  points  that  the  Christian  life  is  dependent  upon  good  works, 
and that Christ's relationship to the faithfui  has been properly understood  in 
the Zwinglian view of  the relationship  between  a sign and  that  which  it sig-
nifies. 

As  Bullinger  traversed  the  short  distance  from  his  house  to  the  Gross(cid:173)

münster  the  driving  issue  of  the  day  could  hardly  have  been  disguised,  the 
crisis of poor  relief. As Hans Ulrich Bächtold  has shown, during this period 
Bullinger began to speak out more forcefully  on social matters, and in an ad(cid:173)
dress  (Fürtrag)  before  the  Zürich  Council  on  7 March  1551 Bullinger  justi-
fied the intervention of the church in the political discussion of poor relief  on 
the  grounds  of  biblical  authority."  The  Situation  in  both  the  city  and  rural 
areas had  grown  desperate  as large numbers  of people were appearing  at the 

16  The subject of spirituality has not figured prominently in scholarship on the Zürich  reforma-
tion. A useful  starting point  is Fritz  Büsser, The  Spirituality  of Zwingli  and  Bullinger  in  the 
Reformation  of  Zürich,  in: Christian  Spirituality. The High  Middle Ages and  Reformation, 
ed by  Till Rait,  New  York  1988, 300-317. 

17  Hans Ulrich Bächtold,  Heinrich Bullinger vor dem Rat. Zur  Gestaltung und Verwaltung des 

Zürcher  Staatswesens in den Jahren  1531 bis 1575, Bern  1982, 240. 

34 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich Bullinger and the Spirituality of the Last Judgement 

doors  of  churches  and wandering  the streets.  In  the meetings  of  the  synod 
ministers increasingly reported  that they were overwhelmed  not only by the 
demands of those seeking assistance but also by the attendant problems of vi-
olence  and criminality.I8  Bullinger  attempted  to remind  the Zürich  Council 
of its promise to deploy resources  garnered from  the dissolution of religious 
houses for poor relief, but he railed in vain. In this context it is clear that Bul(cid:173)
linger's sermons on the Last Judgement, and in particular the second,  formed 
another  salvo in the propaganda  war with  the Zürich  Council  over what  to 
do with the swelling numbers  of people left  destitute by a cruel  conjunction 
of climatic and economic conditions with political  considerations. 

The central issue arising from the Westphal controversy, as far as Bullinger 
was  concerned, was the Lutheran  doctrine  of ubiquity, and his objection  to 
this  doctrine  suffuses  the sermons  on the Last Judgement  in two  important 
ways:  first,  he  repeatedly  emphasizes  that  Christ  is  physically  located  in 
heaven at the right hand of the f ather and not in the world, and, secondly, in his 
language about the relationship between signs and signification. The relation-
ship between Christ and the physical world, so crucial to the Zürich  teaching 
on the Eucharist, is played out in the sermons on the Last Judgement by Bul-
linger's determination  to argue to the people that although Christ is spatially 
separated -  demonstrated  by the fact that he descends and they will be raised 
up -  he is truly present  in them in faith,  by which  they  imitate him  through 
fidelity  to his commands. 

Bullinger's  writings  ofthe  1550s 

Having completed his monumental Decades in 1549, Bullinger's works of the 
1550s  were  largely  focused  on  closely  related  pastoral  and  eschatological 
themes.  The  most  significant  publications  in  this  respect  were  the  Summa 
christlicher Religion  (1556), In Apocalypsim  conciones centum  (1557), and the 
Catechesis pro adultioribus  (1559). All of these were  quickly  translated  into 
the vernacular and described themselves as attempts to explain the faith. The 
vocabulary  of the subtitles  is informative,  with  the repeated  use of  epithets 
such as the faith  <gruendtlich eklaert> (Catechism); what <notwendig sye zuo 
wüssen, zuo glouben, zuo thuon> {Summa);  and that the book  of  Revelation 
is <fürtraeffenlich  und nutzban. The link between pedagogy  and  spirituality 

18  Bruce  Gordon,  Clerical  Discipline  and  the  Rural  Reformation.  The  Synod  in  Zürich 
1532-1580,  Bern  1992, 161-169. The  Situation  was so  dire  that  Bürgermeister  Lavater  ad-
dressed  the synod  in 1556 on the question  of poor  relief, warning the assembled  clergy  that 
the people were destituting themselves by wasting their money on clothes, drink, and gamb-
ling. StAZ E II.I. 446 20 October  1556 (Gordon, p. 163). 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

35 

Bruce  Gordon 

is  explicitly  made,  reinforcing  the  central  idea  that  the  biblical  word,  when 
properly  explained  is a clear  guide  to  the practical  Christian  life. In  this  re-
spect  Das  Jüngste  Gericht  is  most  obviously  connected  with  Bullinger's 
Summa  christlicher Religion  and Sermons  on  Revelation." 

Written  against  the  background  of  the  Bolsec  affair  in  Geneva  and  the 
outbreak  of  the  ferocious  dispute  between  Calvin  and  Sebastian  Castellio, 
Bullinger's Summa  urgently requires scholarly scrutiny; it is Bullinger's  most 
extensive treatment  of the Christian  life  and contains  his developed  thought 
on various aspects of his spirituality, such as prayer and good works.20 In the 
Summa,  Bullinger, in the face of internecine Protestant warfare, the desperate 
plight  of  the  people,  and  the  fragile  relations  with  the  Zürich  magistrates, 
sought to cast in relief the essentials of Christian living. And in the preface  he 
articulates  once  again  his  guiding  principle,  that  the  Christian  faith  is  clear 
and understandable,  and that  it is the  duty  of  the church  to  grasp the  truths 
God has revealed.21 This is precisely the point he wished to underscore in the 
sermons  on  the  Last Judgement:  all that  is necessary  for  the  Christian  life is 
right  before  our  eyes,  but  those  eyes  must  be  guided  by  faith.  Bullinger 
largely omits from  the Summa  the extensive teaching on the Last Judgement 
developed  in the Das Jüngste  Gericht,  choosing only to provide, in his treat(cid:173)
ment  of the Apostles'  Creed  and again in the concluding  section on <von tod 
und  end>, a brief  recap of the  argument.22 

During the 1550s Bullinger was also intensively engaged with eschatologi-
cal  questions,  and  Das Jüngste  Gericht  falls  in  the  shadow  of  his  Hundred 
Sermons  on the Apocalypse,  which  appeared  in Basle two years later in  1557 
and  was  quickly  translated  into  German,  French,  and  English.23  Despite 

19  Summa  Christenlicher  Religion.  Darinn  uss  dem  wort  Gottes  /  one  alles  zancken  und 
schaelten / richtig und kurtz / anzeigt wirt / was einem yetlichen Christen notwendig sye zuo 
wüssen /  zuo glouben / zuo thuon  und zuo lassen / uch zuo lyden / und  saeligklich  abzuos-
terben: in Artickel gesteh / durch Heinrychen  Bullingern. Zürich,  1556. Staedtke, HBBibl  I, 
no. 283. 

20  For a summary of Bullinger's views on the covenant in the Summa, see J. Wayne Baker,  Hein(cid:173)
rich Bullinger and the Covenant. The Other Reformed  Tradition, Athens, Ohio  1980, 49-53. 
We await the results of the scholarly work  on the Summa  currently  being carried  out in Zü(cid:173)
rich by Roland  Diethelm. 

21  <so ist die Christlich Religion darumb nit unendsam und so manigfaelt / dann das ein yetlicher 
Christ  nütdestminder  in  den  raechten  houptpuncten  wol  unnd  richtig  kommen  mag  zuo 
einem einfalten  und  gnuogsamen verstand  der waren Religion>. Summa, fol. Aiiv. 

22  A  brief  discussion  of the  Last Judgement  is found  in Bullinger's  discussion  of  the  Apostles' 

Creed  (fol. Mviiir v) and  again on fol. Zviiv. 
I refer  here to the English translation  of  1561: A Hundred  Sermons upon  the / Apocalips of 
Jesu Christe, reveiled in /  dede by Thangell  of the Lorde: but seen or /  receyued  and  written 
by thapostle and Evange / list. S. John.. .[London, 1561]. Staedtke, HBBibl I, no. 355. The lit-
erature  on  the  sermons  is  now  fairly  extensive:  Irena  Backus,  Reformation  Readings, 
103-104; and her Les Sept Visions et la Fin des Temps; les commentaires genevois de l'Apoca-

23 

36 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

some  common  ground  between  these  two  works,  such  as their  shared  em-
phasis  on  pastoral  matters,  it  is  noticeable  that  the  sermons  on  the  Last 
Judgement  make sparing use of the Book of Revelation. There are some  ref-
erences  sprinkled  through  the  sermons,  and  Bullinger's  description  of  the 
event is drawn  from  the judgement  scene  of  Revelation  19, but Das  Jüngste 
Gericht  contains  none  of  the historical  speculations  concerning  the  Church 
and the dating of Antichrist which populate Bullinger's Hnndred  Sermons.24 
All such reckonings and historical allusions have been put aside in favour  of a 
discourse  on  the  ethical  implications  of  judgement.  Nevertheless,  the  exe-
gesis  of  the  Book  of  Revelation  was  central  to  the  religious  language  and 
mentality of the Zürich reformers  in the middle decades of the Century.25 

The  First  Sermon 

The  fundamental  premiss  of  Das Jüngste  Gericht  is  a  Bullinger  common-
place:  scripture  is  absolutely  clear  to  those  who  receive  it  in  faith,  either 
through reading or hearing, and when properly explained under the guidance 
of  the  spirit  it  teils  us  all  that  we  need  to  know.26  This  sanguine  emphasis 

lypse  entre  1539 et  1584 Geneva,  Lausanne, Neuchätel,  1997 (CRThPh  19); W. P.  Stephens, 
<Bullinger's  Sermons  on the Apocalypse>, in: Die Zürcher  Reformation:  Austrahlungen  und 
Rückwirkungen,  ed  by  Alfred  Schindler  and  Hans  Stickelberger,  Zürich  2001, 261-280; Ri(cid:173)
chard  Bauckham,  Tudor  Apocalypse  -  Sixteenth  Century  Apocalypticism,  Millenarianism 
and the Engilsh Reformation:  from John Bale to John Foxe and Thomas Brightman  (Apple(cid:173)
ford,  1978); and his <Heinrich Bullinger, the Apocalypse  and the English, in: The Swiss  Con-
nection: Manchester Essays on the Religious Connections between England  and  Switzerland 
during the  16th and the 20th Centuries, ed by Henry  D. Rack, Manchester,  1995, 9-54;  Aur-
elio A. Garcia Archilla,  The  theology  of  history  and  apologetic  historiography  in  Heinrich 
Bullinger  : truth  in history, Lewiston, NY, 

24  Bullinger,  Hundred  Sermons, 461-465. Bullinger  interprets  the  various  aspects  of  Christ  in 
Revelation  19, such as the horse, his crown, the garment with blood etc. The emphasis in the 
Hundred  Sermons, in contrast  to Das Jüngste  Gericht, is upon  liberation  from  persecution. 
25  The Swiss Confederation  had  once again stood  at the brink  of dissolution  in  1547  following 
the publication of < Der Endtchrist> by Rudolf  Gwalther in 1546. This work, like <Das Jüngste 
Gericht), was a collection of sermons, but what had inflamed  the Catholic  Confederates  was 
Gwalther's  identification  of  the  papacy  with  Antichrist.  After  several  extremely  stormy 
sessions  of the Swiss Diet, where it was demanded  that  Gwalther  be punished, an  agreement 
was reached that all sides should seek to control their clergy, a resolution which Bullinger did 
not  find  at all comforting.  Apocalyptic  language had  dangerous  political  overtones  and  this 
must  have weighed  on  Bullinger  during  his work  on  Revelation  in the  1550s. See  Bächtold, 
Heinrich Bullinger vor dem Rat, 94-104. Gwalther's work is entitled: Der Endtchrist.  Kunze 
/  klare  und  einfaltige  bewysung  in  fünff  Predigen  be//griffen/  Daß  der  Papst  zuo  Rom  / 
raecht  /  war  /  groß  und  eigenlich  Endt//christ  sye  von  welchem  die  H. Prophe//ten  und 
Apostel gewyssagt unnd  und  gewarnet habend.. .(Zürich,  1546). 

26  On  Bullinger's  articulation  of  this  view  in  his  Hundred  Sermons,  see Stephens,  Bullinger's 

Sermons, p. 265. 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

37 

Bruce  Gordon 

upon  the clarity of scripture was a hallmark  of the Zürich reformation:  God 
has revealed  all that humanity needs to know, and with the tools which have 
been provided  individuals  may  plumb  the  depths  of  divine wisdom  and  re-
veal  its  eternal  truths.27  The  essential  tools,  as  Zwingli  had  declared  in  his 
preface  to the  1531 Bible, were those  of philology, which  enabled  the  prop(cid:173)
erly trained to pull from  the text of the Bible its authentic  meaning.28 

But this was only part  of the story. The spirituality  of the Zürich  reform-
ers must be discussed in terms of translatio,  by which God's Word is realised 
in the world. In the eyes of the Zürich reformers  this involved a crucial  bond 
between  the  Latinate  and  vernacular  cultures,  and  translatio  encompassed 
two  closely  related  moments:  first,  the  translation  of  God's  word  from  the 
biblical languages into Latin and the vernacular, and, secondly, the shift  from 
the  study  to the Community  through  the discernment  of  the practical  appli-
cation of God's Word. The process of elucidating scripture -  and in Zürich it 
was  a process -  remained, in the eyes of the reformers,  a useless exercise  un-
less it resulted  in practical  guidance  for  the faithful.29  The  mediating  priest-
hood  for  Bullinger  was no  longer  to  be found  at the  altar, but  in the  pulpit, 
for  the properly  educated  minister  alone  could  bridge  the  distance  between 
linguistic scholarship  and the pastoral needs  of the people.30 The  sermons  in 
the three main Zürich churches were the public expression of a whole biblical 
exegesis  industry  in  Zürich  centred  on  the  figures  of  Bullinger,  Leo  Jud, 
Theodor  Bibliander, and  Konrad  Pellikan. 

Das Jüngste  Gericht  offers  a pessimistic  estimation  of what  the  returning 
Christ  will  find,  as  he  will  be  awaited  by  only  a few  faithful.  The  signs  of 
Christ's  imminent  return  are  everywhere,  but  nowhere  more  pronounced 
than  in  the  behaviour  of  the  people,  who  conduct  themselves  without  re-
straint. Bullinger's  assessment  of  his time reads like  a morals  mandate  in re-
verse,  a catalogue  of  all  the  problems  to  be  found  in  the  Community,  from 
lack of parental discipline to excessive drinking and eating. All of this is an  af-

27 

It is sin which  obscures passages in scripture  and as a Christian  enters more into the light of 
Christ  those  passages  become  clearer:  <In uns  allen  zwaren  ist  dünckle  der  sünden  und  ir-
rungen / aber das liecht Gottes worts / der tag des heiligen Evangelii / unnd der  morgenstern 
der geist Christi / trybt die dünckle hin und waeg / das uns die Geschrift  klar und heiter wirtx 
Summa, fol. Bviii*. 

28  Die gantze Bibel der ursprunglichen  Ebraischen und Griechischen waarheyt nach / auffs  aller 
treüwlicschest verteütschet. Getruckt zuo Zürich bey Christoffel  froschouer  / im Jar als man 
zalt M. D. XXXI,  T. 

29  Bullinger  makes this point in the preface  to the Hundred  Sermons, 2. 
30  The model for preaching is God's own revelation of his will to the Israelites. Bullinger Stresses 
that all that was necessary was revealed  in a comprehensible  manner: «Unser Herr  und  Gott 
bat vom berg Synai mit verstentlicher spraach / die von allem volck wol verstanden ward / ge(cid:173)
redt. Die heyligen propheten  habend  geredt und geschriben in keiner froembden  / sunder in 
der Lands und  muoter  spraach>. Summa fol. Bviir 

38 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

front  to  God,  who  in  the  Scriptures  (both  Testaments!)  has  continuously 
warned  of  a judgement  day. Although  Bullinger  emphasises  the  importance 
of  Paul's words  to the Athenians  (Acts  17:29-31), where  the Apostle  argues 
that  God  has  tolerated  the  blasphemies  of  humanity  in  order  that  men  and 
women might have time to repent, in true Zürich fashion  the harmony  of the 
New Testament Statements on judgement with those found  in the Old is con-
tinually underlined.31r Bullinger believes that time had run its course and that 
judgement would  be pronounced.  He  assembles all of  Christ's words  on  the 
last judgement  (Luke  22, I  Thessalonians  5 etc.)  to  remind  his  readers  that 
everything foretold  by the Son of God has come true: <Zuo siner zyt aber  fiel 
nit  ein  büchstab  der  Worten  Christi  hin,  der  nit  vilfaltig  und  mee  für  dann 
hinder erfuellt  wurde.>32 Signs are an essential part of Bullinger's  eschatologi-
cal discourse for they not only indicate God's mind, but serve as a warning to 
the faithful,  who  alone  are able, in part,  to  discern  them. The  signs of  Anti-
christ's  triumph  in  the  world  are  an  indication  of  the  end  of  time,  and  this 
must  serve  to  warn  Christians  to  prepare  themselves.  Bullinger  will  not, 
however,  allow  that  any  Christian  can  know  the  moment  of  God's  judge(cid:173)
ment. 33 

These <last times>, Bullinger's  nomenclature  for  his own  day, are also des(cid:173)

ignated  as  the  <age of  grace>  (zyt  der  gnaden),  by  which  Bullinger  meant  a 
time  for  repentance,  a last  chance.  He  wants  to  de-mystify  the  signs  of  the 
end  by  arguing  that  Christ  interpreted  all of  these  events  for  the  faithful  in 
Matthew 24 and 25, his last sermon before his arrest and passion where he ad-
dresses  the  Last Judgement.  Matthew,  according  to  Bullinger,  has  recorded 
Christ's  sermon  word  for  word,  just  as  he  had  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount 
(Matt.  5-7),  in  order  that  no  person  might  claim  ignorance  of  God's  inten-
tions.  All  will  be judged  because  all have  been  warned  by  the  Son  of  God; 
again,  the  recurring  key  word  is <wachbarkeit>,  the  admonition  to  alertness 
and perseverance  during  godless times.34 Judgement  will come when  human 
wickedness  -  Bullinger  (in  the  Hundred  Sermons)  employs  the  favourite 
Zwinglian parable of the wheat and tares -  has ripened: <As though he shulde 
say: the iniquitie of earthly men is grown up to the highest, therefore is it rea-
son that it shulde be cut downe. And  God alone knoweth, when the iniquitie 
of the earth is  fulfilled>.35 

The fierce warning of the opening section of the first sermon raises the cur-
tain  on  a  more  pastoral  passage  in  which  Bullinger  interprets  a  series  of 

fol. Aiv 
fol. Avr 

31 
32 
33  Bullinger, Hundred  Sermons, 315. 
34 
35  Hundred  Sermons, 467. 

Jüngste  Gericht, fol. Aviir. 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

39 

Bruce  Gordon 

parables concerning divine judgement. Most significantly he seeks to  comfort 
people against  any fear  that they will be rewarded  according  to their  merits, 
which will fall short of what  God  demands. His consolation is that all that is 
good in humanity  is a gift  of  God  given in order that men and women  might 
do good works and thereby honour  God.36 In his pastoral writings  Bullinger 
builds upon his distinction between effort  and merit; he does not want  Chris(cid:173)
tians to think of the latter, but rather he seeks to encourage the former.  Chris(cid:173)
tians will not, however, be judged according to their own efforts,  but  accord(cid:173)
ing to whether they remained <vigilant and true> to God's gift. The language of 
<eff ort> was a pastoral minefield and Bullinger was well aware of the dangers of 
emphasizing  the need for  Christians  to do  good works. The consolation  for 
afflicted  souls, he argued, is that God's gift  of grace will preserve them on the 
final day; they will not have to speak or defend  themselves against a prosecut-
ing God, for  Christ  will be their  defence. That, of  course, was a mainstay of 
Protestant theology. But Bullinger's purpose was, and this becomes clearer in 
the second sermon, to rouse people to the Christian life of activity. He preach-
ed  good  works  because  the  Zwinglian  doctrine  of  love  is  embodied  in  the 
terms <barmherzigkeit> (compassion) and <freundlichkeit>  (friendship),  an ac-
tive love found  in the regenerate  Christian  life. 

Bullinger's  reflection  on  the  nature  of  judgement  must  necessarily  begin 
with  Christ himself, for the Last Judgement  can only be interpreted  in terms 
of  Chalcedonian  Christology  by  which  Christ  is  fully  divine  and  human. 
What  will  be  the  nature  of  this  judge  who  will  descend  from  the  heavens? 
Bullinger held that the faithful  and the damned will behold him according  to 
their  attitude  in  life:  those  who  rejected  him  will  be  confronted  by  the 
wounded  Christ, whose sores remind the damned  of their place in the  cruci-
fixion  narrative and convict them according to their maltreatment  of the Son 
of  God. The faithful,  in contrast, will see Christ  in his glory, as the  Apostles 
did  at  the  Transfiguration.  Judgement,  Bullinger  repeatedly  emphasized,  is 
revelation, a purgative process in which the outer layers are removed to  show 
the true nature of the person. Bullinger's description of the meeting of  Christ 
and  the  individual  at judgement  has  a distinctly  mystical  flavour,  reflecting 
the  enduring  influence  of  medieval  Augustinianism,  the  Devotio  moderna, 
and his colleague Leo Jud. Although Bullinger will not allow any pleading at 
the  moment  of  judgement  -  humans  can  say  nothing  in  their  defence  -
Christ's  appearance  involves  a reciprocity  suggested  by  the  dynamic  of  the 
scene. Christ physically descends from  the heavens to be met by the  ascend-

36  Bullinger argues in the Summa that the purpose of  Scripture  is to teach people God's will so 
that they  might do good works: <Dann alle gschrifft  vonn  Gott  yngeistet /  ist nütz  zur leer  / 
zur straaff  / zur Verbesserung unn zur Züchtigung / die da ist in der geraechtigkeit / uff das der 
diener  Gottes  gantz und ußgemacht  /  zuo allem guoten werck  gerüst sye.> fol. Bv1. 

40 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich Bullinger  and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

ing faithful  in whom he is spiritually present. Bullinger refers  here to his dis-
tinctive  emphasis  on  the indwelling  of  God  in the person  through  the  Holy 
Spirit; faith,  for  Bullinger  is not  descriptive  of  a relationship  between  a per(cid:173)
son  and  God,  but  refers  to  the  very  presence  of  God  in  that  person.37  The 
union of Christ and the believer at the judgement is an expression of Bulling-
er's profound  mysticism. At that moment the extent to which  Christ is pres(cid:173)
ent in each individual  is revealed. 

A nd  all  humanity  will  be  assembled  before  him  and  behold  him  in  his  h u m an  na-
ture  and  all  the  faithful  will  be  overcome  with  joy  when  in  an  instant  they  recog-
nize  that  their  judge  is  their  saviour,  that  in  him  they  have  found  grace,  redemp-
tion,  unity,  reconciliation,  their  eternal  inheritance  through  his  sacrifice.  Also  in 
the  Lord,  w ho  n ow  appears  before  the  world,  [they  see]  that  the  Christian  faith  is 
the true  faith  and  the w o rd  of the  holy  Gospels  is the  indubitable  w o rd  of  G od  and 
that  all  shall  n ow  be  fulfilled  and  is  h u m an  as  the  faith  and  the  Word  of  G od  pre-
dicted.38 

It is an entirely divine moment, with Christ as both judge and defendant,  and 
humanity,  according  to  Bullinger,  reduced  to  silence.  The  silence  of  hu(cid:173)
manity  before  Christ  again  points  to  Bullinger's  mysticism,  for  judgement 
leads to reconciliation  and harmony. In this final  consummation  we find  the 
resolution  of  the  various  dichotomies,  such  as  flesh/spirit  and  external/in-
terior, which formed  the backbone of Zürich theology. In Bullinger's distinc-
tive use of Eucharistie language to describe the Christian life, the  judgement 
is the  fulfilment  of  memoria  through  the unification  of  the  interior  faith  of 
the individual  with  the  external  physical  Christ.  The  individual  and  the  ob-
jeet of faith, Christ, come together in a union prefigured  by the liturgy of  the 
Lord's Supper, thus demonstrating the proper relationship between signs and 
that which they  signify. 

Bullinger  considered  at  some  length  the  significance  of  the  throne  on 
which  Christ will be seated. It represents, as Bullinger had already  argued  in 
his Hundred  Sermons,  Christ's justice, indeed, the supreme justice which will 
brook  no  Opposition.39  All will recognize  it and  be overwhelmed.  Bullinger 
revisited the extensive description of the Last Judgement found  in Revelation 
19, which  he  interpreted  not  so  much  as  an  aecurate  aecount  of  what  will 
happen,  although  it  will  happen  as  God  has  revealed,  but  as  God's  way  of 
preparing the people for  the end of time. John's vision of the Last Judgement 
is a warning, a sign of what  is to come and a reminder  that people must  pre-

37  On this see the important article by Mark S. Burrows,  Christus intra nos Vivens: The Peculiar 

Genius of Bullinger's Doctrine  of Sanctification,  in: ZKG  98 1987, 56. 
fol. BiiT 

38 
39  Bullinger's  interpretation  of the imagery of Revelation  19 is found  in his Hundred  Sermons, 

465^66. 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

41 

Bruce  Gordon 

pare  while  there  is  still  time.40 The  faithful  should  have  already  taken  their 
judge  to  heart  (<in unsere  hertzen  disen  richter  also  herrlich  ynbildind>)  so 
that when  he arrives they  know  the truth  and will greet him with  joy 

All who live and have ever lived will be called for judgement  and  nothing 
shall be hidden f rom the judge. Bullinger develops the theme of individual and 
corporate  culpability  by  considering  how  at  the  moment  of  judgement  the 
conscience  shall prosecute  and the deeds of the ungodly  will be revealed  be(cid:173)
töre the assembled mass of humanity. He invokes the very human fear of  em-
barrassment by noting that nothing will remain disclosed except for the faith(cid:173)
ful  who,  in  a  reference  to  John  5,  will  have  their  sins  covered  by  Christ. 
Humiliation  may await only  the ungodly,  but  Bullinger knew from  pastoral 
experience and years of association with the Ehegericht  in Zürich  the  power 
of  rumour  and  gossip  in  the  Community  and  the  lengths  to  which  people 
would  go  to  conceal  damaging  news  from  family,  neighbours,  and  author-
ities.4I  He  made  good  use  of  this  to  warn  his  listeners  about  the  disclosure 
facing those who f ail to put their life in order in this world. It may be painful  to 
settle one's account now, but it is nothing compared to what will happen at the 
final  moment  when  all shall  see what  an individual  has done  and  thought.42 
Bullinger  then  turns  to  the  relationship  between  the  living and  the  dead, 
paraphrasing  the description  in Paul's letter  to the Thessalonians  (1 Thessa-
lonians  4:13-18)  of  Christ's  return  and  the  summoning  of  the  dead  and  the 
living.  Bullinger  reiterates  points  made  earlier,  such  as how  humanity  will 
rise up to meet the judge in the clouds and that there shall be no resistance. In 
that  moment  all  creation  will,  for  the  first  time  since  the  fall,  be  wholly 
obedient, just as the animals were in Coming to Noah's ark;43 the whole of hu(cid:173)
manity will respond  to  Christ  with  child-like  fear  (kindtlicher  forcht)  as the 
power of God is feit. All shall tremble. Although Bullinger loosely employs a 
ränge  of  images,  mostly  drawn  from  scripture,  to  describe  the  event,  the 
judgement  scene is presented to his listeners primarily as a courtroom  drama 
which  opens with the judge taking his seat before  the assembled body of  hu(cid:173)
manity. There  is, however,  a fundamental  difference  in  that  this  trial has  no 
defence,  for  humans  will not  be able to  answer  the  charges  against  them; in 
Bullinger's  words, no petitions  or  answers, Speeches or  counter-complaints, 
witnesses or supporters will be entertained. The prosecution, judge, and jury 
will be the conscience, which will accuse and  convict  the person.44 The  trial, 

Jüngste  Gericht, fol. ~BY. 

40 
41  The  dynamics  of  sin,  discipline,  and  communal  response  in  Zürich  have  recently  received 
thorough  attention  in  Francisca  Loetz,  Mit  Gott  handeln.Von  den  Zürcher  Gotteslästerern 
der Frühen Neuzeit zu einer Kulturgeschichte des Religiösen, Leinen 2002. 
fol. Bvv 
fol. Bviiir 
fol.  Cir 

42 
43 
44 

42 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

Bullinger is very clear, is only for  the guilty, for  although all humanity  Stands 
condemned,  the faithful  will be spared  the horror  of facing  the judge by  the 
fact that this judge turns out to be their key witness. In Bullinger's account of 
the judgement  in Das Jüngste  Gericht  the faithful  are quickly  removed  leav-
ing the damned  to face the process. 

The  image  of  Christ  in  Bullinger's  account  of  the  Last  Judgement  em-
bodies  the  Zwinglian  language  about  the  Son  of  God.  It  is  his  suffering 
(lyden)  which reveals him in his füll  humanity; the suffering  Christ  as the re-
deemer of a suffering  people is a central theme of Zwinglian spirituality. The 
physicality  of  his flesh  and blood  is what unites him to humanity, not  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  but  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Christian  life. 
The confirmation  of the unity  of the faithful  with  Christ is found  in the mo-
ment  that  he  meets  each  person  as  their  wounded  saviour.  These  very 
wounds, which are the signs of redemption, are also what convict the godless, 
for  they  are visible expressions  of their unbelief. 

The  decisive  moment  is  the  Separation  of  the  saved  from  the  damned, 
and, not  surprisingly,  Christ  will divide humanity  into two  unequal  groups. 
Bullinger  stays  with  the  contrast  with  earthly  courts  and  human  forms  of 
judgement, where despite sincere efforts  to ensure fairness  there is inevitable 
confusion  and  injustice  on  account  of  the  chasm  between  outward  appear-
ance and inner reality. Bullinger turns to the Situation of religion to make his 
point.  Humans,  he  argues,  are  divided  according  to  their  religions  (Jews, 
Turks, and Anabaptists  -  Catholics, curiously, are not  mentioned) with  each 
maintaining  that  their  faith  is  the  true  one.  Yet,  even  among  evangelical 
Christians  one person  is said  to  be devout  and  honourable  while  another  is 
despised,  although  in  truth  it  may  be  the  second  person  who  loves  God 
while  the  first  deftly  simulates  piety.  Human  judgement,  he  concludes  for 
his listeners, has no insight into the thoughts of individuals, and who is truly 
innocent  or  guilty  will  remain  a  matter  of  debate.  In  contrast,  for  Christ 
there will be no hesitation: judgement, followed  by sentencing, will be quick 
and  decisive,  because  all  hidden  thoughts  of  the  heart  will  be  openly  dis-
played. 

Lest  his  hearers  should  find  this  too  disquieting,  Bullinger  turns  to  an(cid:173)
other  set piece of Zwinglian  images  of  Christ, the  Good  Shepherd. The  lan(cid:173)
guage, of  course, is taken from John  10 and Bullinger builds around  it a dis-
cussion  of  Christ's  judgement,  essentially  covering  the  same  ground  again, 
but  this time in a more  comforting  manner. The  sheep will be placed  on  the 
right  and  the goats to the left; what  distinguishes  the sheep is that they  have 
heard  the  voice  of  Christ,  have  responded  in  faith,  and  are  God's  friend 
(Gottes fründ).45  This idea of the friendship  of God ran deeply in the writings 

45 

fol. Ciir 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

43 

Bruce  Gordon 

of the Zürich reformers.46  It is found  in Zwingli, who  commented  in his  De 
vera  et falsa  religione  that  <God  is the  beginning  and  foundation  of  all  true 
and  lasting  friendship>.  The  term  is  used  with  particular  frequency  in  the 
writings  of Jud  and Bullinger as an expression of divine and human  Commu(cid:173)
nity; it speaks to the transforming of human relationships through the love of 
Christ and of the intimacy of the believer's relationship with the Son of  God. 
The reward  of faith  is friendship  with  God, but Christ's ministry and  suffer-
ing was also a supreme act of friendship,  which makes that final union poss-
ible. Any  one who  seeks  another  way  to  God  than  Christ  has forfeited  that 
friendship  and will be found  among the goats: starkly put, those who do  not 
believe are damned  (<welcher nit gloubt wirdt  verdampt>). 

Christ then speaks to both the saved and the damned. To the sheep he says 
<come here the chosen  of  my father>,  an invitation  which  Bullinger  argues is 
the final purgation  from  all that is impure  (unrein),  that is sin, the devil, and 
death.47 Who then are the chosen of God? They are the children of  Abraham. 
Bullinger  turns  to  the  language  of  the  covenant  to  make  the  point  that  this 
new  relationship  is  through  the  faith  of  Abraham  (<mit  und  durch  den 
glouben  Abrahams>) in Christ. Those who  have believed  in  Christ  are  sum-
moned  to  the  place  prepared  for  them  where  joy  surpasses  any  art  of  ex(cid:173)
pression by the tongue.4S There are two crucial aspects to Christ's  invitation: 
first,  the faithful  are told  they  are to <inherit  the  kingdom> which,  secondly, 
<has been prepared  for  you  from  the  Start  of  the world>. Here  we  find  Bul-
linger's  only,  and  rather implicit,  reference  to predestination,  suggested  as a 
cause  for  joy  as  God  has  chosen  the  faithful  for  a heavenly  home  from  the 
moment  of creation. More than  that  Bullinger  chooses not  to say. 

Bullinger is not yet ready to discuss the fate  of the goats; they take  centre 
stage in the second sermon. He is more concerned  at this point to  encourage 
rather  than  dispirit,  and  by  assuring  the faithful  that  God  has marked  them 
for salvation, he turns to the vital subject of good works, commenting that he 
has frequently  been asked about the merit of human works and what a Chris(cid:173)
tian  should  do.  Although  he  offers  a  fairly  pithy  response,  Bullinger 
hammers  away at the subject,  producing  a forest  of  biblical citations  in Sup(cid:173)
port  of  his central  argument  that  good  works  are good  only  insofar  as  they 
flow  from  God's  grace. 

46 

47 
48 

44 

I am currently working on a study of the term <friendship>  in Zwinglian writings. In the  fifth 
sermon of the second Decade Bullinger touches upon friendship  in a manner characteristic of 
the Zürich  reformers  by  linking  it with  God's  central purpose  for  humanity: <that is for  the 
preserving  of  friendship  and  societe  among  men, the  Lorde  in  the  Gospell  saieth:  whatever 
yee would  that men shoulde doe to you, doe yee the same to them>. Decades, 102. 
fol.  Civr 
fol.  Cvr. 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

Therefore,  whoever  would  wish  to  be  a faithful  Christian  should  above  all  seek 
true faith  in  Christ  from  which  shall come works  of  love as the  Lord  has  shown 
here  and  in  other places. Such  a person  will be judged  on  the  last day  at the  Last 
Judgement  and will find a merciful  judge.49 

What  is  required  of  Christians  is  faithful  obedience  to  Christ's  command  to 
love  one's  neighbour.  This  is clearly  the  Standard  Protestant  line, but  the  par-
ticular  emphasis  on  the  ethical  imperative  of  the  commandment  was  a  hall(cid:173)
mark  of  southern  German/Swiss  theology.  Further,  the  weight  which  Bul(cid:173)
linger  gives to  the intimacy  between  G od  and  the  individual  is arresting.  This 
returns  us  to  the  dilemma  mentioned  above:  on  the  one  hand,  Bullinger 
wants  to  underscore  the  importance  of  human  activity  whilst,  on  the  other, 
he  maintains  that  G od  is  the  source  of  all  goodness.  In  order  to  avoid  instil-
ling in  his parishioners  any  sense that  they  cannot  meet  God's  demands,  Bul(cid:173)
linger  insists  that  God,  in  his  love,  has  provided  his  people  with  all  that  is 
necessary  for  them  to  fulfll  his  demands.  He  does this  because his love for  his 
children  is so  consuming.50  Bullinger  is  speaking  here  to  the  crucial  dynamic 
of  his  theology:  God's  covenantal  relationship  with  his  people  is  determined 
by  one  demand  -  that  the  people  be  faithful  (gehorsam) 
to  his  command-
ments.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  the  damned  are  frequently  named 
by  Bullinger  as  the  <disobedient>  (ungehorsam).  The  language  of  obedience 
frames  Bullinger's  theological  and  pastoral  thought,  and  he  is  at pains  to  em-
phasise  that  it is the  authentic  human  response  to  God's  friendship.  He  wants 
his  listeners  to  understand  that  God's  devotion  to  humanity  is  such  that  He 
does  not  ask  anything  of  men  and  w o m en  that  they  cannot  achieve  with  His 
assistance. The  path  of  obedience,  for  Bullinger, is not  through  the  sacramen-
tal  structure  of  the  medieval  church,  but  is  marked  by  the  temporal  and  ec-
clesiastical  ordinances  of  the  State,  which  through  their  teaching  and  disci-
pline  provide  the  guide  to  eternal  life.  F or  a man  involved  in  a bitter  dispute 
with  the  Zürich  magistrates  over  p o or  relief,  the  preaching  that  the  institu-
tions  of  the  State  are  instruments  of  God's  mercy  must,  at  moments,  have 
stuck  in the  throat.  Perhaps  that  is w hy  he  ends  the  first  sermon  with  the  bit-
ing  question: 

Whoever possesses worldly wealth and goods and sees his brother suffer  need and 
closes his heart  and  [is without]  compassion.. .where is the love of  God  in him?51 

fol. Oiiv. 

49 
50  <Dann so lieb  sind  wir  menschen  dem  Herren  das  er uns  goent  sine gaben, darzuo  gern  wil 

von uns ufnemmen  was wir im zuo dienst nach sinem wort  thuond.> fol.  Cviiir 
fol.  Divv 

51 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

45 

The  Second  Sermon 

Bruce Gordon 

The  second  sermon  drawn  from  Matthew  25:41-46, forms  the  other  half  of 
the diptych and considers Christ's words to those on his left. As the flrst  ser(cid:173)
mon was intended  to comfort  the faithful  by assuring them that they will be 
greeted  by the  saviour  at that  moment,  the second  deals in fear,  as Bullinger 
reminds  his  readers  that  just  as God  rewards  good  works  so too  he  harshly 
judges sin.52 Bullinger employs binary language throughout, yet this time he 
emphasizes  that  the  polar  opposites  remain  bitterly  unreconciled.  Christ's 
disposition  and  attitude towards  the unfaithful  is the direct  inversion  of  the 
love and  gentleness  shown to the  faithful: 

Just as he before  the faithful  has said, they shall inherit the kingdom  that has been 
prepared for them, so also he promises the damned the eternal fire which the devil 
and his angels, or fallen  ones, has prepared  for  them.53 

Christ  dismisses  the  damned  from  his presence  and  wishes  to  hear  nothing 
further  of them. Why, Bullinger  asks, would  he never want  them  back?  The 
answer, he responds, is to be found  in the nature of their offence.  They  have 
desecrated  life,  and  Christ  is  the  true  life.  Consequently,  they  have  most 
grievously offended  against the Son of God. This Interpretation  of the eternal 
judgement  contains  the  language  of  purity,  which  is  the  crucial  partner  to 
obedience in Bullinger's spirituality. The true Christian life, the life of  obedi-
ence, is free of defilement;  it is pure, as God is pure. This biblical sense of pu(cid:173)
rity (Reinheit)., drawn from  the commands in Leviticus  11:41—45, was promi(cid:173)
nent  in  Zwingli's  preaching,  and  its  iconoclastic  message,  and  writing.  The 
Zürich reading of the Old Testament was to equate purity with holiness, and 
for Bullinger the Christian life must involve purgation, the Stripping away of 
all that is unclean (unrein).  The final judgement, therefore, is the fulfilment  of 
Christian  spirituality, a purifying  of all that has remained  unclean. 

Bullinger is remorseless  in blaming the damned  for  their fate; they  separ-
ated themselves from  life (Christ) in this world through their pursuit  of their 
own lusts, and Christ shall reward them with  eternal Separation. In  language 
drawn  from  the  City  of  God,  Bullinger  speaks  of  the faithful  keeping  Com(cid:173)
pany with  God whilst the damned  cavort with the devil -  a reference  to  both 
the proper  and perverted forms  of friendship  raised earlier. Bullinger  empha-
sises  that  the  Last  Judgement  will  put  paid  to  all  false  logic  in  the  world 
through  the  Separation  of  good  and  evil.  Such  distorted  thinking  is  to  be 
found  in  common  perceptions  held  by  the  people,  and  Bullinger  dwells  at 
some length upon the questions which arise out of what he perceives as a fail-

52 
53 

fol. Dvv 
fol. Dvir 

46 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

ure  to  comprehend  God's  justice. Some  wonder,  he writes, whether  G od  will 
punish  all wrongdoing  or  whether  he  can  even  see every  transgression,  while 
others  believe  that  G od  is  unjust  because  evil  prospers  in  the  world.  These 
are familiär  topoi  set out  by  Bullinger  to  be  rejected  in turn,  as he  asserts  that 
in  each  case  the  Bible  offers  unequivocal  counterproofs. 

The  false  and  true  love  found  among  humanity  is  matched  by  t wo  differ-
ent types  of  fear,  that  of  the ungodly  w ho  do  not  wish  to  lose what  they  have, 
and  the  fear  of  G od  which  is the  starting point  of  all spirituality.54  The  godly 
have  in  their  hearts  a fear  of  God's  judgement,  for  they  k n ow  the  magnitude 
of  their  unworthiness.  Yet  they  are  able  to  comfort  one  another  with  the 
promises  contained  in  scripture  that  G od  shall  not  fail  to  reward  good  and 
punish  evil. This  is  w hy  they  flee  to  Christ  as  their  only  defence  in  the  final 
court;  it is the  Son  w ho  will pronounce  the  w o rd  of  judgement,  but  he is  also 
the  one  judged,  and  by  his  merit  alone  the  faithful  are  saved.  There  is,  h o w-
ever,  a subtle  shift  in  the  sermon  at  this  point  as  Bullinger  moves  away  from 
the  subject  of  faith  towards  good  works.  What  will  damn  the  unfaithful  will 
be  Christ's  judgement  of  the  fruits  of  their unbelief: they  did  not  feed,  clothe, 
house,  or  visit  him  because  they  did  none  of  these  things  for  the  poor.  Their 
lack  of  compassion  or  charity  demonstrates  the  absence  of  faith  in  Christ. 
They  have  not  believed  so  they  are  damned.  Without  faith  there  is  no  love, 
and  without  love  there  can  be  no  good  works.  This  is  the  simple  formula 
which  Bullinger  employs  during  the  remainder  of  the  sermon  as  he  turns  to 
the  principal  ethical  dilemmas  of  his  day. 

Bullinger's  withering  contempt  falls  most  directly  on  those  w ho  are  pros-
perous  and  wealthy  yet  do  nothing  for  the  poor,  although  almost  as  bad  are 
those  tepid  souls  w ho  would  like  to  help,  but  do  nothing: 

When  however  you  wish  to  help, but  do  not, you  have a spiritual  unfaithfulness 
(or disloyalty) (gystige  untruew)  in your heart. You prefer  silver, gold, tatters  and 
waste, wretched  corruptible things to your God and neighbour, who has been cre-
ated  in the  image of  God.  How  can one think  that  you  demonstrate  love of  God 
when  you  do  not  love him  or  demonstrate  any  compassion  towards  your  neigh(cid:173)
bour?55 

Whether  it  be  human  weakness  or  a hardened  rejection  of  G od  matters  little 
to  Bullinger,  the  result  is the  same, a grotesque  offence  against  Christian  love 
which  will  be  judged  by  Christ.  Such  actions  reveal,  at  least  to  some  degree, 
the  inner  life  of  a person,  and  in  his  discussion  of  ethics  Bullinger  makes  re-
peated  reference  to  offensive  ungodly  conduct  as  a sign  {zeichen)  of  unfaith. 
The  language  of  signs  is  important  to  Bullinger's  treatment  of  the  Christian 

54 
55 

fol. Eiv 
fol.  Eivr 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

47 

Bruce  Gordon 

life  and provides  men and women  with  the possibility  of reading their Spiri(cid:173)
tual  State. Bullinger  links  discipline  (zucht)  with  love  (liebe)  reinforcing  his 
belief  that  the  ordered  soul  becomes  manifest  in  an  ordered  life.  Therefore, 
just  as indiscipline  is a sign  of unbelief,  the peaceful  (ruwig)  heart  reflects  a 
good  relationship  with  God,  a certainty  of  one's  salvation.56  The  particular 
issue which  animates  Bullinger  is necessity  (notdurfft)  and  he  rehearses  the 
arguments  for  why  it is essential  to  the  Christian  life. Each  person  must  be 
willing to  aid those  in need,  even if it means considerable  personal  sacrifice. 
People  will  object,  Bullinger  writes,  that  they  themselves  have  little  and  if 
they  give  to  the  poor  they  too  will  have  to  send  their  children  begging  to 
others. Against  this  Bullinger  replies  that  necessity  (notdurfft)  is  permitted 
by  God  so that people  may  be thankful  for  what  they  have and use  material 
things in good conscience. In giving to the poor, he assures his audience, they 
are not expected to make their wives, children, parents, and other  dependents 
starve or freeze. What God  requires is that anything extra should be given to 
those in need. Quoting  1 Timothy  6:8 (<But if we have food  and  clothing we 
will be content  with that>) Bullinger  argues that people should  not  keep  any 
excess when  there  are others without  food  or  clothing. 

Bullinger then turns to the issue of personal possessions and wealth. In the 
New Testament, he states, there are examples of venerable wealthy men, such 
as  Nicodemus  and  Joseph  of  Aramathea,  who  did  not  give  away  all  their 
money  yet  were  righteous.  With  perhaps  one  eye  on  his  fellow  guildsmen 
and  the  magistrates, Bullinger  explains  that  their  wisdom  was in using  their 
resources  well. The  argument  has strong  echoes  of  the Aristotelean  concept 
of  magnanimity,  whereby  a wealthy  man  who  uses his  largesse to  build  the 
Community does a virtuous  act, while the one who  simply hoards it for  per(cid:173)
sonal use is to be despised. Bullinger was in dangerous territory here with his 
political  masters.  The  subjects  of  usury  and  taxation  interested  him  very 
much  and  he  had  expressed  some  forthright  views  on  the  topics.  Bullinger 
distinguished  between  usury  which  was  lawful,  whereby  interest  was  legit-
imately  gained  on  legally  grounded  transactions,  and  that  which  was  not, 
which  was  the  unlawful  taking  of  interest.57  With  this  distinction  in  mind 
Bullinger condemned in particular the Zinskauf  (a usurious rent-charge) as it 
was  reducing  the  rural  farmers  to  impecunity.5S  Bullinger's  agreement  with 
the Zürich  magistrates  was that  he would  say little about  those  financial  ar-
rangements which  had  been  sanctioned  by  the Council and would  speak  out 

56  This  point  is  stressed  in  the  Summa,  where  Bullinger  writes: <also das  er  in  sinem  hertzen 
ruwig nd mit Gott wol zefriden  / sinen glouben mit allerley zucht / eer / trüw und liebe oder 
andern  derley  fügenden  /  zuo  Gottes  lob  und  eer /  und  der  menschen  besserung /  erzeige  / 
ouch mit wachen und  baetten  des herren zuokunfft  warte.> Fol. Aiiir. 

57  On  this see Eric Kerridge,  Usury, Interest  and the Reformation,  Aldershot 2002, 28-30. 
58 

Ibid., p. 43. 

48 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger  and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

only  against  the profiteering  rampant  throughout  the  land.  By  his  own  ad-
mission, Bullinger understood  little about  financial  transactions. 

The maintenance of proper and lawful  business arrangements was a godly 
duty.  Bullinger  produces  a hierarchy  of  sin  which  has  at  its  summit  those 
who fail to care for  their families  and household  or to look  after  those, such 
as widows  and  orphans, who  have no means  of supporting  themselves. Bul(cid:173)
linger pulls no punches: not  to care for  one's family  is a sign of unbelief  and 
the person will be counted among the damned: <one who does not care for his 
own house has betrayed  the faith  and is, therefore,  an unbeliever>.59  Usurers 
{wuocherer)  come next, and their primary offence  is not greed, though that is 
bad  enough,  but  the  absence  of  compassion  (unbarmhertzig).  Not  only  do 
they  refuse  to  feed,  clothe, or  house  those  in need,  but  when  others  are  un-
able  to  pay  they  have  them  thrown  in  prison  and  seize  their  possessions.60 
This is entirely contrary to God's will and such men will have little chance on 
the final  day. Their parsimony  and hard  heartiness, in Bullinger's  mind,  dis-
tinguish  them little from  the next group, those who  enjoy  too much  licence. 
Such  men  and  women  fall the  disciplinary  records  of  the  sixteenth  Century, 
and  their  offences  must  have  been  wearily  familiär  to  Bullinger  by  1555: 
drinking,  dancing,  card  playing,  violations  of  the  clothing  ordinances,  etc. 
What  in  particular  disturbed  Bullinger  was  the  excessive  consumption  of 
food  and wine, especially the latter. The drinking culture in rural areas was a 
persistent  problem  for  the church  and  Bullinger  returned  to  this  subject  in-
numerable  times during  his career  as Antistes. His  familiär  warning  is taken 
from  Luke  21.61  Those  who  avariciously  consume  the  food  and  drink  pro-
vided  by  God  are  considered  by  Bullinger  to  be  nothing  more  than  pigs 
(schwyn). 

Next to be scourged are those magistrates who abuse their office,  who  are 
reminded  that they must answer to a superior judge. This was naturally  awk-
ward territory, but by the 1550s Bullinger was not inclined to Step away  from 
confrontation,  and he begins with  a familiär  theme: the preservation  of  true 
religion is dependent  on  the honest  and  Christian  men holding temporal  of-
fices in the cities and rural areas. But his particular interest is the question of 
poor relief  and he returns to the subject. A most evident sign that the  Gospel 
has been neglected is the failure to provide for the poor and destitute, an acid 
test for  faith. The care of the poor  is given a sacramental hue when  Bullinger 

fol. Eviv 
fol. Eviir 

59 
60 
61  <Keep a watch on yourselves; do not let your minds be dulled by dissipation and  drunkenness 
and worldly cares so that the great Day closes upon you suddenly like a trap; for that day will 
come on all men, wherever they are, the whole world over. Be on the alert, praying at all times 
for strength to pass safely through all these imminent troubles and to stand in the presence of 
the Son of Man>. Luke 21:34-36. Quoted  by Bullinger on fol. Fir. 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

49 

Bruce  Gordon 

draws  a  parallel  between  feeding  the  b o dy  and  the  soul.  As  Christ  has  p r o-
vided  the  spiritual  food  in  the  bread  and  wine  the  faithful  should  respond  to 
this  gift  by  feeding  the  p o or  and  homeless.62  The  care  of  the  poor,  so  central 
to  Bullinger's  spirituality,  is referred  back  to  Christ's  response  to  the  damned 
w h en  they  ask  where  he  was  w h en  they  should  have  fed  him.  All  of  these 
ethical  demands  are  placed  in  their  eschatological  setting: 

All and  sundry  will  have  to  give account  at the  Last Judgement  to  the  righteous 
judge  for  all their  affairs  but  in  particular  for  how  they  have provided  food  and 
drink for  the Christian  Community and how they cared for  the Word  of  God  and 
the offices  of the State.63 

God's  terms  are  non-negotiable  and  quoting  Matthew  15  Bullinger  argues 
that  there  can  be  no  excuses  for  failure  to  fulfil  the  divine  command,  and  hu-
mans  cannot  apply  to  any  moral  Standard  other  than  that  set  d o wn  by  God. 
Moral  compromise,  even  that  seeming  most  justifiable  to  human  reason,  is 
anathema  to  true  religion,  and  Bullinger  revisits  this  theme  in  his  denunci-
ation  of  the  alacrity  with  which  people  abandon  the  absolute  conditions  of 
God's  covenant.  The  repeated  emphasis  on  the  lucidity  of  God's  will  is  in-
tended  to  head  off  any  Suggestion  of  mitigating  circumstances  on  the  Last 
Day, when  some  might  hope  to  justify  themselves. The  only justice  is  Christ. 
Bullinger  had  the  evil  of  such  compromise  very  much  in  mind  when  he 
made  his  admonition,  also  to  be  found  in  the  Hundred 
to  those 
w ho  hold  offices  that  the  principal  duty  of  the  magistrate  is  to  ensure  the 
propagation  of  the  Gospel. A ny  shirking  of  this  responsibility  will be  judged 
most  severely.  Following  those  w ho  practice  corruption  in  office  come  the 
equally  offensive  pliers  of  war.  Bullinger's  lifelong  revulsion  towards  war  is 
well  k n o wn  and  he  returns  here  to  a  familiär  theme  -  the  moral  turpitude 
brought  by  unjust  wars  and  violence. 

Sermons, 

The Judge  requires  truth,  friendship,  love, and  prudence  towards  our  neighbour 
by feeding, giving drink, clothing, housing, comforting  the poor and widows. War 
is directly opposed  to all of these.64 

F r om  war  comes  destruction  and  rape, with  all the  fruits  given  by  G od  plun-
dered  and  misused.  All  the  essential  institutions,  such  as  churches  and  hos-
pitals, are destroyed  and  the laws  of the land  are despised.  H o w,  Bullinger  de-
clares, can  one  adequately  bewail  such  destruction? 

The  care of prisoners  is next  and  Bullinger  combines  an  admonition  to  the 
magistrates  that  justice  be  carried  out  rigorously  and  fairly  with  a  reminder 

62 
63 
64 

fol. FiiT. 
fol. Fiiv. 
fol. Fivv. 

50 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich Bullinger  and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgement 

to the faithful  that they should visit prisoners and treat them as Christ  treated 
the  thief  on  the  cross.65  He  cites  the  Samaritan  of  Luke  10 as  the  pastoral 
model for  Christians who seek to avoid caring for prisoners or the sick on the 
grounds  that  they  have  no  qualifications.  Christ  requires  each  Christian  to 
do whatever he/she can. Bullinger remarks that care of the sick is rare  among 
Christians for most in the city wish neither to see nor hear those who are dis-
eased  or dying.66 Bullinger has nothing but  contempt  for  those who flee ill-
ness and the sick. He  asks  bitterly: 

Do you wish that Christ should abandon you in your illness, anxiety, and emer-
gency? Of course not!67 

The faithful  should put  their faith  in God  and  serve the sick without  fear  of 
illness  or  death. Think,  Bullinger  reminds  his listeners, of  those  final  words 
of Christ to the damned: <Depart from  me, when I was sick you  did not visit 
me>. 

Finally Bullinger arrives at the clergy, who he says will be judged  accord-
ing to their conduct in the pulpit and in the parish, in particular whether  they 
engaged  in  works  of  love,  friendship,  and  compassion  towards  the  parish-
ioners whilst  punishing  the wicked, whom  he names  as usurers,  oppressors 
of the poor, and  all involved  in war. 

Bullinger  concludes  with  an  admission  that  there  are  others  who  might 
have  been  named  for  their  sins  had  his primary  purpose  been  to  provide  a 
catalogue  of  shame, but  his  true  intention  was  to  illustrate  from  scripture  a 
fundamental  point, that  God's Word  is clear, comprehensible, and  unchang-
ing, and that, therefore,  no person will be excused  on the Last Day. God  has 
revealed  in  Scripture  all that  needs  to  be  known  about  the  final  judgement 
and what is expected of each man and woman. Bullinger could not put it any 
more plainly than when he concludes: 

You,  who  would  be  a Christian  cannot  be  excused  for  not  having  performed 
works of compassion (barmhertzigkeit)68 

Compassion  is the last word  in Bullinger's spiritual vocabulary to be treated 
in Das Jüngste  Gericht  and he makes his meaning utterly  clear.  Compassion 
is love  of  one's  neighbour  grounded  in  a total  trust  in  God's  promises.  The 
opposite of this virtue is not simply heartlessness but a tepid love which  finds 
justifications  for inactivity. Bullinger enumerates the excuses familiär to him: 

fol. Fvr 

65 
66  On  the  unwillingness  of  many  ministers  to  visit  the  sick,  see  Gordon,  Clerical  Discipline, 

169-175. 
fol. Fviiir 
fol. Fviiiv. 

67 
68 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

51 

Bruce Gordon 

some say, he remarks, that they do not know what do, while others claim that 
they  fear  what  the poor will do to them, for  they  are violent. Others  simply 
find  themselves  overwhelmed  by the  extent  of poverty  and feel  they  cannot 
make  any  difference.  On  this  last point  Bullinger  agrees that  no  one  person 
can  solve  all the  problems,  but  that  each  person  has  a responsibility  to  do 
whatever  one  can  (Thuo  als vil  du  magst).69  God,  Bullinger  assures  his  lis-
teners, will respond positively to those who seek to help those in need, but he 
will reject those who attempt to shield themselves from  their responsibilities: 

These  and  other  similar  excuses  are  not  adequate,  certainly  not  before  God.  We 
stand  before  God  and  his  judgement.  He  sees  us  in  our  hearts  and  knows  our 
thoughts. Let us go justly before  him. For  the end of all things  is near.70 

This can be reduced to one simple choice: does a person desire eternal life  or 
damnation? The catalogue enumerated in the second sermon was not  intend-
ed  as  a forensic  examination  of  different  forms  of  sin,  rather  it  is  an  Illus(cid:173)
tration  of  one  point:  all  disobedience  is  the  consequence  of  the  absence  of 
faith. Failure to make the necessary choices in this life required by God's cov-
enant  cannot  be  overlooked,  for,  as  Bullinger  continues  to  remind  his  lis-
teners,  judgement  is  inherent  in  creation  and  the  Christian  life,  and  inner 
judgement will give way at the end of time to Christ, who will separate  truth 
from  falsehood  and  damn  all unbelief. About  this  there  can be no  doubt,  as 
Christ has left ample Instructions in the Scriptures, and his words in the  New 
Testament confirm  the judgements  of the Old Testament prophets. Bullinger 
refers to book 21 of the City  ofGod,  to quote Augustine's refutation  of  those 
who  deny  the  fires  of  Hell  by  averring that  Scripture  has plenty  of  evidence 
for  the eternal damnation  of those who reject  God. For Bullinger those  who 
find  themselves  on  Christ's  left  are  the  unbelievers,  but  what  interests  him 
more  in  this  sermon  is the  fruits  of  their  unbelief,  such  as corruption,  viol-
ence, and  greed  and how they  can be identified  in the  world. 

Das Jüngste  Gericht  is not a major  work, but with its mixture of implicit  and 
explicit themes, these two sermons must be read in the context of  Bullinger's 
fundamental  writings  of  the  1550s, a period  of  remarkable  theological  syn-
thesis, and of the extraordinary social and religious upheaval in which  Zürich 
found  itself  embroiled.  In these sermons  we hear Bullinger in füll  prophetic 
voice, thundering  at the  Zürich  magistrates  and  angry  with  the  prosperous 
burghers and established families  of the city, fearful  of God's judgement,  and 
exhorting the people to good works. The sermons throw light on the  manner 
in which Bullinger linked together biblical exegesis with the events of his day 

69 
70 

fol. Giv. 
Ibid. 

52 

Zwingliana XXIX, 2002 

Heinrich  Bullinger  and the Spirituality  of the Last Judgeraent 

in an almost daily dialogue from  the pulpit and how that relationship was ex(cid:173)
pressed  through  a  ränge  of  rhetorical  strategies.  He  sought  to  address  the 
farmer  and the magistrate  at the same time, encouraging  the first  whilst  cas-
tigating the latter by drawing upon a thesaurus of biblical images to apply his 
message in different  measures. On  one level the sermons are pedagogical  and 
straightforward,  reflecting  the Zürich  theological  emphasis  on  the clarity of 
Scripture. Yet we have  also  seen  that  Bullinger  frequently  deals  in  multiple 
meanings; the  treatment  of  the  Last Judgement  is both  a discussion  of  a  fu-
ture event and a metaphor for  the Christian life, both corporate  and  individ-
ual, and woven  through  the text is a commentary  on contemporary  political 
and theological  discourses. 

Bruce Gordon,  Reformation  Studies  Institute, University  of St  Andrews 
St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9AL, Great  Britain 

Zwingliana  XXIX, 2002 

53 

