Personal  Conviction  and  Pastoral  Care: 
Zwingli  and  the  Cult  of  Saints  1522-1530 

by  PAMELA  BIEL 

According  to  Oskar  Farner,  Huldrych  Zwingli  arrived  in  Zürich  in  January 
1519  with  definite  ideas  about  the  nature  of  true  religion.  His  program  for  re-
forming  the  religion  of  the  people  of  Zürich  into  its  pristine  State  included  a 
complete  rejection  of  the  cult  of  the  saints.  On  theological  and  Scriptural 
grounds  Zwingli  rejected  the  conception  of  a saint  as it was  understood  by  the 
mediaeval  Church,  rejected  pilgrimages, relics, and  icons.  Nonetheless,  Zwingli 
was not  able  to  eliminate  the  cult  immediately;  the  Zürich  city  Council  did  not 
abolish  the  cult  until  nearly  six  years  later.  Even  after  the  city  fathers  had  for-
mally  outlawed  the  cult  and  decreed  that  the  images  were  to  be  covered,  the 
matter  was  hardly  settled. 

One  may  attribute  the  ongoing  discussion,  in  which  Zwingli  took  an  active 
part,  to  two  facts: within  the  territories  that  became  Protestant  in  Switzerland, 
as in much  of mediaeval  Europe, the  cult of the  saints was the  touchstone  of po(cid:173)
pulär  piety  and  as  such  could  not  simply  be  eliminated  by  the  say-so  of  priest, 
prophet  or  politician;  and  the  treatment  of  the  saints  came  to  be  seen  by  the 
Catholic  neighbors  of  Zürich  as the  litmus  test  of  heresy.  Zwingli  was  aware of 
these  two facts  and  they tempered  his treatment  of  the  cult. This paper will exa-
mine  the  ways  in  which  Zwingli  tried  to  accomplish  his  theological  ideal  -  eli-
mination  of  the  cult  -  while  maintaining  order  within  Zürich  and  good  rela-
tions  with  necessary  political  allies.  By examination  of  Zwingli's  work  between 
1522  and  1530  I investigate  how  the  Reformer's  principles  worked  in  the  prac-
tice  of a sixteenth  Century city. Thus  one  may  see the  cult as a stalking  horse  for 
the  larger  issues  of  the  Reformation  in  Switzerland,  namely  how  to  actualize 
Reformation  ideals  in  an  urban  context. 

The  Statement  with  which  I  opened  this  discussion,  that  Zwingli  was  a  Re-
formed  theologian  in  1519  upon  his  arrival  in  Zürich,  is  not  as  obvious  as  it 
might  sound  since  many  argue  that  Zwingli  did  not  achieve  a  complete  Re(cid:173)
formation  outlook  until  several  years  after  his  arrival  in  Zürich.  Nonetheless 
Zwingli's  attitude  at this time  can be characterized  by three  typical  Reformation 
principles. One  hallmark  of  this attitude  can  be  seen  in  his  first  action  upon  his 
arrival  at  Zürich:  on  January  2  he  began  a  series  of  sermons  in  which  he 
preached  straight  through  the  Gospel  of  Matthew. This not  only demonstrates a 
typical  Reformation  desire  to  approach  the  Word  of  God  directly,  but  it  ex-
presses  Zwingli's  humanism  as much  as his  ideas  about  Reformation.  This  plan 
involved  a  radical  abandonment  of  the  usual  lectionary  and  Zwingli  himself 

442 

characterized  it  as  "ein  für  deutsche  Menschen  unerhörtes  Unterfangen"  in  a 
letter  to  a  friend.1 

In  1519 Zwingli  was also capable  of  criticizing  the  Roman  Church,  although 
he  was  still  receiving  a papal  pension.  His  criticisms  resemble  those  of  Luther, 
in  that  he  perceives  the  Roman  Church  as  filled  with  Italians  greedy  for  the 
money  of his fellow  countrymen.  In late  1518 Beatus Rhenanus  wrote Zwingli: 

Risimus  abunde  veniarum  institorem,  quem  in  literis  tuis graphice  depinxisti.  Dant 
belli ducibus literas pro perituris in bello. Quam sunt haec frivola  et pontificiis  legatis 
indigna! Quid  non tandem excogitabitur, ut nummis nostris potiatur  Italia? Nee vero 
risu haec digna puto, sed lachrymis potius.2 

Finally,  Zwingli  had  adopted  by  1519  an  explicitly  Pauline  anthropology. 
The  Pauline  principle,  that  a  person  is  only  made  righteous  by  her  complete 
and  total  faith  in Jesus' redemptive  death, was  a centerpiece  of  all  Reformation 
theology. Zwingli incorporates  this idea into his all-pervasive  Christology  and  it 
first  appears  in  his  plague  poems  of  1519. 

These  three  Reformation  principles -  insistence  on  the  primaey  of  Scripture, 
Opposition  to  the  Roman  Church  of  the  day,  and  Pauline  anthropology  -  are 
described  by  Wayne  Pipkin  in  his  unpublished  dissertation  "The  Nature  and 
Development  of  the  Zwinglian  Reformation"3  as  a  'false-true'  religious  princi(cid:173)
ple.  Pipkin  may  oversimplify  in  his  claim  that  Zwingli  judged  each  instance  as 
either adhereing to  Scriptural  principles  or deviating completely  from  them; yet 
retained  as  a  conceptual  tool  this  principle  provides  the  advantage  of  showing 
that  Zwingli  had  a  clear  and  definite  pereeption  of  what  constituted  true  reli-
gion  in January  of  1519. 

Given  this  background,  the  reasons  why  Zwingli  came  to  rejeet  the  eult  of 
the  saints  seem  fairly  clear,  and  quickly  become  familiär  after  reading  even  a 
few of  Zwingli's  tracts. As he  said  in  1523, "man  die  bild  nit  solle machen,  man 
solle  sy nit  anbetten,  man  solle  sy ouch  nit  eeren..."4  Not  only  does  the  eult of 
the  saints  not  appear  in  the  Bible,  but  when  the  Bible  does  mention  images 
they are condemned.  Zwingli  conflates  the  eult  of  the  saints with  its prime  ma-
nifestation,  imges  of  saints,  and  called  the  two  "abgötterei",  idolatry  or  that 
which  turns  people  away  from  God. 

Zwingli  primarily  objeeted  to  the  eult  for  this  very  reason:  it  turns  people 
away from  Christ. He  explains  the genesis  of  his conviction  that  the  veneration 
of  the  saints  deprives  Christ  of  due  honor.  In  1523  he  wrote: 

1  Cited  in  Oskar  Farner,  Huldrych  Zwingli  -  Seine  Verkündigung  und  ihre  ersten 

Früchte, Zürich  1954,  29f. 

2  ZVII115L, 
3  Wayne H. Pipkin, The Nature and Development of the Zwinglian Reformation  to Au(cid:173)

gust  1524, unpublished  thesis: Hartford  Seminary  Foundation  1968. 

443 

Ich hab vor 8. oder 9- jaren ein trostlich gedieht gelesen des hochgelerten  Erasmi von 
Roterdam, an den herren Jesum geschriben, darinn  sich Jesus klagt, das man nit alles 
güts  by  im  sucht,  so  er  doch  ein  brunn  sye  alles  guten,  ein  heilmacher,  trost  und 
schätz der seel, mit vil schönen Worten. Hie hab ich gedacht: Nun ist es ie also. Wa-
rumb  suchend  wir denn  hilff  by der  creatur?  Und  wiewol ich  darnebend  andre  car-
mina oder gsang bim eegenanten  Erasmo fand an sant Annen, s. Michaelen und andre, 
darinn  er die, zu denen  er schreib, als fürmünder  anrüfft,  hat  doch  dasselb mich  nit 
mögen bringen von der erkantnus, das Christus unser armen seelen ein eyniger schätz 
sye .. .5 

Since  Zwingli  thought  that  the  cult  of  the  saints  focussed  the  Christian's  at(cid:173)

tention  on  something  other  than  Christ,  it  had  to  be  eliminated. 

Further,  Zwingli  thought  that  the  cult  of  the  saints, as  displayed  in  pictures 
in  churches  and  in  relics,  lead  necessarily  to  idolatry,  the  most  heinous  sin  of 
the  Old  Testament.  He  coneeeded  that  idolatry  and  saint-worship  were not  one 
but  noted, "Ich  schätz  ouch  nit  als böss  sin an'n  heiligen  hangen  als an'n  abgöt-
ten, wiewohl  ich weiss, dass es verdamlich  ist, so man  die  hoffnung  uff  die  crea(cid:173)
tur hat."6  Later in  the  same work, Zwingli  denotes  the  scholastic  distinetion  be-
tween  latria,  dulia,  and  hyperdulia  as "trumpenwert".  In  the  course  of  the  sec-
ond  disputation  at  Zürich Jacob  Edlibach  tried  to  separate  the  issue  of  the  cult 
from  that of idolatrous  representations  of the  saints. Zwingli  cut him  off,  saying, 
"Es  gilt  nit  meinen.  Bringent  die  götlich  gschrifft  harfür!"7  It  is  interesting  to 
note  that when  images were clearly not  liable to be worshipped  Zwingli  allowed 
them  to  remain  in  his  churches,8  indicating  that  the  real  issue  in  removing  pic(cid:173)
tures  from  churches  was  idolatry  and  not  distraction  from  the  Word  of  God  as 
it  came  to  be  for  other  reformers. 

To  Zwingli  the  cult  was, by  its very  nature,  a  manifestation  of  false  religion 
since  it  lacked  Scriptural  substantiation,  caused  idolatry,  and  distanced  people 
from  Christ. Zwingli understood  both  the use of images and  the  Mass, which  he 
also wished  to  eradicate, as attempts  by people  to  achieve  God's  favor  by  means 
other  than  simply  throwing  themselves  on  God's  love  and  merey.  Aside  from 
the  presumptuousness  of  such  attempts,  they  are  doomed  to  fail  because  only 
the  love  and  righteousness  of  God  are  effective  for  salvation.  Thus  Zwingli  at-
tacked  the  role  of  the  saints  as  mediators  or  intercessors.  This  constituted  his 
primary  theological  objeetion  to  the  cult. Other  aspects  of veneration  may  have 
appeared  to  Zwingli  to  be  unappealing,  or  silly, or  designed  to  lead  the  simple 
astary, but  owing  to  the  Christological  emphasis  in  his  theology, a trait  fostered 
by  his  reading  of  Paul,  it  is  the  saints  as  intercessors  which  disturbed  Zwingli 
most  of  all. 

5  ZII2178_19 
6  Z«17032_33 
7  ZU  711,,.,, 
8  Hans  Fh  von  Campenhausen,  Die  Bilderfrage  in  der  Reformation,  in:  Zeitschrift  für 

Kirchengeschichte  68  (1957)  100. 

444 

Given  his  great  störe  of  theological  ammunition,  one  might  wonder  why 
Zwingli  did  not  simply  fix  his  sights  on  the  nearest  saint  and  blast  away. To  a 
certain  extent  he  did,  or  attempted  to, yet  it  turned  out  that  not  only were  the 
saints fairly agile at eluding his fire, but also that various reasons made  marching 
around  the walls singing to the  Lord a more  practical  mode  of Opposition  than a 
frontal  attack.  Zwingli  was aware  of  certain  pragmatic  reasons which  prevented 
him  from  simply  eliminating  the  cult  and  its  manifestations  at  one  feil  swoop. 
First, and  perhaps  foremost  in  Zwingli's  mind, was the  fact  that  the  cult  was 
the  vehicle  for  populär  religion  in  Switzerland  as  well  as  across  Europe  at  this 
period.  The  pictures  of  the  saints  were  the  Biblia  pauperum  for  a mostly  illite-
rate  population.  Pictures  in  churches  gave  rudimentary  instruction,  strength-
ened  the  memory,  and  encouraged  devotion.  Perhaps  stemming  from  the  im-
portant  role played  by the  saints  in  early education,  people  came to  expect  help 
and  holiness  from  the  saints,  an  attitude  which  had  been  criticized  from  the 
twelfth  Century  forward. 

The influence  of the cult of the saints pervaded all aspects of populär life  and 
consequently  abrupt  elimination  of  it  would  have  been  devastating,  if  not  im-
possible. Conrad  Schmid  advocated  the  removal  of  the  cult but  noted, "man  sol 
ie  dem  schwachen  sinen  stab, daran  er  sich  hebt,  nit  uss  der  hand  ryssen,  man 
gebe  im  dann  ein  anderen,  oder  man  feilet  inn  gar  ze  boden."9 

Another  issue  tempering  the  Reformer's  desire  to  eliminate  the  cult  of  the 
saints was the  intricacy  of  Swiss politics.  From  the  start  Zwingli  had  linked  the 
reformation  of  religion  to  the  issue  of  mercenary  service, a subject  of  considera-
ble  interest  to  Rome.  In  1521  Zürich  had  sent  a  contingent  of  mercenaries  to 
assist  in  the  Piacenza  expedition.  They  were  not  paid  in  füll,  although  Zürich 
annually  sent  representatives  to  Rome  to  request  payment.  After  the  advent  of 
Zwingli, the  papacy refused  payment  on  account  of  the  nefarious  Lutheran  her-
esy  rampant  in  the  city-state. As  G. R. Potter  notes, "Papal  money  was  scarcely 
likely  to  be  paid  to  heretics."10  Lutheran  or  not,  Zürich  had  a  good  case:  the 
men  had been  sent on  the  expedition  with  no  religious strings attached,  fulfilled 
their  part  of  the  bargain, and  thus  were  entitled  to  payment.11  Zwingli  was  cer-
tainly  not  making  it  easy  for  the  Council  to  obtain  payment  since  he  was 
continually  involved  in  disputes  and  arguments.  Before  1522  at  least  two  pub-
lished  tracts  had  appeared  against  him. One  was by  Conrad  Hoffman,  the  other 
anonymous. Along with  various  complaints  about  his  style  of  preaching, the  at(cid:173)
tackers  complained  that  he  had  defamed  Mary,  questioned  the  efficacy  of  the 
saints  and  claimed  the  cult  was  unbiblical.12  Zwingli  had  also  written  several 
tracts  in  which  he  referred  to  the  Pope  in  a most  disparaging  manner. 

9  zu  704^,3 
10  G. R. Potter,  Zwingli,  London  1978, 227. 
11 
12  Farner, Op. cit.  180. 

Ibid,  227. 

445 

Zwingli's  remarks  notwithstanding,  the  issue  here  was  whether  the  city 
of  Zürich  was  cherishing,  venerating,  defending,  and  protecting  the  Roman 
Church.  Since  Zwingli's  initial  attack  on  the  saints  did  not  so much  as  question 
the  possibility  of  intercession  as it  questioned  the  ability  of  Rome  to  decide  in-
fallibly  on matters  of doctrine, the  city's attitude  toward  the  saints could  not  but 
be  read  as  indicative  of  its  attitude  toward  the  Mother  Church.13 

Breaking  with  Rome  had  consequences  for  Zürich  beyond  offense  to  the 
person  of  the  Pope  or  monies  for  mercenary  Service  left  uncollected.  Once  Zü(cid:173)
rich made  herseif  objectionable  to the  Pope  she would  become  equally so to  the 
majority  of  the  Swiss  Confederation.  When  the  Zürich  Council  forbade  the 
Mass and  ordered  that  each  church  cover  the  images  of  the  saints, the  Catholic 
cantons  had  few  choices. War  with  Zürich,  one  of  the  most  powerful  cantons, 
would  have  been  impractical  because  of  Zurich's  military  might  and  because 
such  action  could  have  unfavorably  influenced  those  cities  which  had  not  yet 
taken  a firm  stand,  notably  Bern  and  Basle. Ostracism  of  Zürich,  even  if  it  had 
been  possible, given  Zurich's  central  location  and  the  importance  of  her  grain-
growing  suburbs,  could  have  meant  the  end  of  the  Swiss  Confederation  as  it 
had  existed  for  nearly  two  centuries.  Thus  serious  attempts  were  made  by  the 
Catholic  cantons  to  reconcile  Zürich  with  Rome.  In  the  face  of  such  good-will 
violent supression of the cult would  have been both  rüde and  counterproductive. 
Zürich  also  had  continually  to  combat  the  charge  that  she  was  the  home  of 
the  radical  dement  hated  and  feared  by  Reformed  and  Catholic  alike.  Begin-
ning with  the  breaking  of  the  Lenten  fast  in  1522, and  continuing with  Zurich's 
role  in  protecting  the  arsonists  and  iconoclasts  in  the  Ittingen  affair  of  1525, it 
did  not  seem  that  those  who  charged  the  Zürich  Council  and  Zwingli  with  en-
couraging  Anabaptist,  anarchist,  and  violent  parties  were  far  from  the  mark.  If 
Zürich  chose  to  break with  Rome, the  onus was on  her  to prove  that  anarchism 
was  not  the  only  alternative  to  Roman  Catholicism.  The  weight  of  this  proof 
stayed  the  city council's  hand when  it came  to  the  elimination  of  the  cult.  Inter(cid:173)
national  considerations,  likewise,  shaped  Zurich's  and  Zwingli's  attitude  about 
the  saints. 

There  were  several  different  ways  that  Zwingli  could  go  about  the  elimina(cid:173)
tion  of  the  saints  and  the  "bilddienst"  associated  with  it.  Zwingli  attempted  to 
eliminate  the  cult  his  first  year  in  Zürich.  He  forbade  adoration  of  the  saints, 
prayers  to  the  saints  on  behalf  of  the  dead,  and  pligrimages.  The  reaction  was 
immediate  and  hostile;  as  Charles  Garside  notes,  "Evidently  Zwingli  had  dis-
covered  that  preaching  against  the  cult  of  the  saints  involved  an  assault  upon 
the  nerve-center  of  people's  faith."14  Zwingli's  second  way  of  approaching  the 

13  Else  Beurle,  Der  politische  Kampf  um  die  religiöse  Einheit  der  Eidgenossenschaft, 

Linz  1920, 20. 

14  Charles  GarsideJr., Zwingli and the Arts, New Haven  1966, 95. 

446 

cult  was  by  way  of  education.  If  the  people  could  not  digest  the  solid  food  of 
Scripture  and  Reformed  religion, they  had  first  to be  fed  on  milk  and  sops  until 
they  were  weaned.  This  plan  for  educating  the  people  suffered  from  pressure 
from  both  sides: some  feit  that  only  the  Roman  Church  could  teach  the  people 
about  matters  of  belief  and  some  feit  that  Zwingli  proceeded  too  slowly  in  his 
work.  Zwingli  envisioned  a  clergy  which  would,  in  an  imitation  of  Christ,  me-
diate  the  Gospel  to  the  people.15  The  radical  element,  however,  took  matters 
into  their  own  hands  on  occasion  by  fits  of  iconoclasm  aimed  at spurring  along 
the  education  of  the  people. Although  Zwingli  deplored  such  disorderliness, he 
understood  the  outbursts  of  violence  as  indications  that  the  people  were  ready 
to  dispose  of  the  various  trappings  of  what  he  perceived  of  as  false  religion. 
Zwingli  also  depended,  to  a great  extent,  upon  the  Zürich  Council  and  the  ma-
gistracy  to  help  effect  the  removal  of  the  cult  of  the  saints  by  a  combination 
of  the  tireless  teaching  of  the  ministers  and  the  cooperative  endeavors  of  the 
ministry  and  the  magistracy. 

Although  Zwingli's  Suggestion  in  1519  that  the  Zürichers  renounce  entirely 
the  cult  of  the  saints  met  with  no  success  in July  of  1522  he  again  seemed  to 
hope  that  the  saints  along with  a long  list  of  misguided  practices  of  the  Roman 
Church  would  vanish  at  his  Suggestion.  At  first  glance  Zwingli  seems  not  to 
have  learned  anything  after  his first  three  and  a half  years in  Zürich, yet the  fact 
of  the  matter  is  that  Eine freundliche  Bitte  und  Ermahnung  stems  from  Zwin(cid:173)
gli's first  experiences  in openly defying  the  Roman  Church. The  famous  sausage 
incident  at  the  home  of  the  printer  and  personal  friend  of  Zwingli,  Froschauer, 
had  caused  Zwingli  publicly  to  assume  the  position  that  he  had  long  held  in 
private.  The  publication  of  Von  Erkiesen  und  Freiheit der  Speisen in  April  had 
provoked  a  reaction  from  the  Bishop  of  Constance  but  no  recognition  of  the 
larger issue by the  city Council. Later  Zwingli  had  confronted  the  immobility of 
the  Roman  Church  on  the  matter  of  clerical  celibacy. 

The  revision  of  Zwingli's  original  plea  for  clerical  marriage,  now  translated 
into  German  and  addressed  to  the  people  of  the  Swiss Confederation,  appeared 
in July  1533 under  the  title  cited  above.  Eine freundliche  Bittelists  a number  of 
abuses  by  the  Roman  Church  of  true  religion;  included  in  this  list  is  the  prac-
tice  of  creating  saints  on  a daily  basis  along  with  taxes  and  tithes.  Having  been 
completely  ignored  by  the  bishop,  to  whom  these  issues  were  initially  ad(cid:173)
dressed,  Zwingli  proceeded  to  present  these  matters  of  ecclesiastical  polity  to 
the  people  as a whole. This  democratization  of  religious  authority  reflects  both 
a despair with  the  established  hierarchy  and  a belief  that  the  Holy  Spirit  guides 
each  and  every  Christian  making  each  potentially  capable  of  formulating  theo-
logical  opinions. 

15  Jacques Figi,  Die  innere  Reorganisation  des  Großmünsterstiftes  in  Zürich  von  1519 

bis  1531, Affoltern  1951,  38. 

447 

Eine freundliche  Bitte  did  not  serve  its author's  covert  purpose  of  uniting  the 
Swiss against  Rome. Although  many  within  Zürich  stood  behind  Zwingli,  out-
side  the  city  Opposition  was  mounting.  Zwingli  wrote  several  more  treatises  to 
explain  his  position  to  his  countrypeople;  the  largest  and  most  complete  of 
these,  the  Archeteles,  apeared  in  August  1522. In  September  Zwingli  published 
the  Predigt von der ewig reinen Magd  Maria  in which  he  considered  the  issue of 
intercession. 

The  sixteenth  Century had  seen  a blosseming  of  the  cult  of  Mary, due  in  part 
to  the  sanction  given  to  it  by  Sixtus  IV  at  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  Century.10 
Zwingli  himself  was  hardly  exempt  from  interest  in  the  Virgin,  as  Locher  has 
argued.17  The  populär  esteem  for  the  Virgin  made  the  widespread  rumors  that 
Zwingli  had  called  her  a  trollop  devastating.  In  order  to  counter  such  accusa-
tions, which  implied  that  all  of  Zürich  was  blaspheming  the  Virgin  and  acting 
in  an  irresponsible  manner  by  retaining  Zwingli  as  Leutpriester,  Zwingli  pub(cid:173)
lished  his  sermon. 

Zwingli  opened  by  asserting  that  he  has  nothing  but  praise  and  respect  for 
Mary.  Even  so,  "Das  Ave  Maria  is  nit  ein  gebet,  sunder  ein  grüz  unnd  ein 
lob."18  Mary  can,  ultimately,  do  nothing  more  for  humanity  than  she  has  al-
ready  done, namely  give  birth  to  God  incarnate. This  limitation  of  Mary's  pow-
ers  rests  on  the  fact  that  "er  (Jesus)  ein  einiger  mitler  ist  zwüschend  got  und 
dem  menschen, in  dem, das er sich  ein  rantzung  oder  lossgelt  ussgeben  hatt  für 
alle menschen."19  Given  the  exemplary  nature  of the  life  and  faith  of  Mary, she 
would  be  aware  of  Christ's  singular  role  and  all  of  the  false  and  self-glorifying 
ways  by which  people  praise  her  image  would  offend  her  greatly. 

In  this  sermon,  which  is  far  less  political  than  his  earlier  works,  one  may 
note  the  emergence  of  two  important  themes  which  dominate  Zwingli's  treat-
ment  of  the  cult  of  the  saints. The  first  characteristic  is Zwingli's  stalwart  desire 
to  publish  what he  perceives  as the  truth  of the  Bible in  spite  of  the  unpopular-
ity  of  the  message.  Political  concerns  and  a  sensitivity  to  the  issues  of  the  day 
mediate  his  personal  conviction  at  various  times  during  his  career, yet  periodi-
cally throughout  his tenure  in  Zürich, Zwingli  assumed  an  unpopulär  stance  on 
such  issues  as  mercenary  soldiership  and  pensions.  The  second  characteristic 
exhibited  by this  sermon  comes  to  temper  the  violence  of  his  personal  feelings. 
This  is the  desire  not  to  cause  offense  to  the  people. Although  cynics  may  sug-
gest that  this concern with  offense  stems  from  a "more  bees with  honey"  princi-
ple,  in  fact  some  have  read  his  attitude  as  part  of  Zwingli's  conception  of  his 
mission.  Siegfried  Rother  devotes  a long  section  of  his  monograph  to  Zwingli's 

16  Documentation  to  be  found  in  Willi Meister,  Volksbildung  und  Volkserziehung  in 

der Reformation  Huldrych Zwingiis, Zürich  1939, 86 et passim. 

17  Gottfried  W.Locher, Zwingli's Thought: New Perspectives, Leiden  1981, 47ff. 
18  Z I 408,, 

448 

self-conception  of  himself  as  an  instrument  of  God.20  If  Zwingli  had  as  pro-
nounced  a  Sendungsbewußtsein  as  Rother  suggests,  then  causing  offense  would 
be more  serious than  merely  adding to  a list of  enemies. Alienation  from  Zwin-
gli's  message  would  be  alienation  from  the  Word  of  God  and  would  endanger 
the  soul.  Bringing  people  into  the  fold  of  true  believers  becomes  a  matter  of 
eternal  life  and  death,  a responsibility  which  Zwingli  as a pastor  took  seriously. 
Whether  or  not  the  Zürich  Council  agreed  with  Zwingli's  idea  of  his  own 
mission, by the  end  of  1522  they could  not  ignore  his  teachings. So, as was cus-
tomary  in  many  Swiss and  imperial  cities  in  the  sixteenth  Century, a public  dis-
putation  was  arranged. 

The  disputation  of January  1523 generated  three  documents,  the  67  Schluß(cid:173)
reden around  which  the  debates  were  to  be  held, a transcription  of  the  disputa(cid:173)
tion  itself,  and  the  Auslegen  und  Gründe  der  Schlußreden,  which  appeared  six 
months  after  the  debate  and  which  is  one  of  Zwingli's  most  comprehensive 
theological  platforms. 

The following  articles of the  67 Schlußreden are those relevant to the topic at 

hand: 

werdend. 

3.  Dannenher  der einig weg zur säligkeit Christus ist aller, die ie warend, sind und 

18.  Dass Christus, sich selbs einest uffgeopfert,  in die ewigheit ein wärend und beza-

lend  opfer  ist für  aller gloubigen  sünd;.  .. 

19.  Das Christus  ein einiger mitler ist zwüschend gott unnd uns. 
20.  Das uns gott alle ding wil in  sinem  namen  geben; darus entspringt, dass wir us-

serthalb diser zyt keines mitlers dörffend  denn sin. 

21.  Das, so wir für einander uff  erden bittend, das in der gestalt thüend, das wir allein 

durch  Christum  uns alle ding gegeben werden  vertrüwent. 

58.  Das urteyl der abgescheidnen  ist allein got  bekant.21 

The  first  thing  to  note  is that  nowhere  in  the  above  cited  articles, or, in  fact, 
anywhere  in  the  Schlußreden  has  Zwingli  explicitly  mentioned  the  cult  of  the 
saints. One  might  imagine  that  Zwingli was not anxious  to bring up  this  touchy 
subject  before  the  gathering  of  over  600  people,  lay  and  clerical,22  especially 
since  Zwingli's  position  on  this  issue  would  not  have  been  populär.  None-
theless, when  in the  course  of  the  debates Johannes  Fabri, sent  by the  Bishop of 
Constance, was  forced  to  pronounce  the  doctrine  of  veneration  that  of  the  Ro(cid:173)
man Church, Zwingli lept in, delighted, "Lieben brüder in Christo!" he exclaimed, 

Es ist on zwyfel nitt on sunder geschick und willen gottes beschehen, das min herr vi-
cari eben von der anrüffung  oder fürbittung  der heiligen und der müter gottes thüt re(cid:173)
den.23 

20  Siegfried  Rother,  Die  religiösen  und  geistigen  Grundlagen  der  Politik  Huldrych 

Zwingiis, Erlangen  1956, 28. 

21  Z  I 45816_17; 4606_7; 46012; 460B_]4; 46015_17; 46418 
22  Potter, Op. cit. 100. 
23  Z  I 5064 7 

449 

The  Reformer  then  goes  on  to  decry  the  cult  of  the  saints  upholding,  in  no 
uncertain  terms,  the  role  of  Christ  as  the  sole  mediator  for  humanity.  Zwingli 
demonstrates  throughout  the  course  of  the  debate  his  all-pervasive  Christologi-
cal  emphasis.  Zwingli  condems  the  cult  because  he  exalts  Christ  as  the  only 
way  to  salvation,  a perpetual  offering  to  God  the  Father,  and  the  sole  mediator 
for  humanity. 

The  Schlußreden appeared  only a few  days before  the  actual  debate, an  inade-
quacy  which  provoked  complaint  but  not  withdrawal  by  Fabri  and  others.  The 
disputation  was  more  or less  orderly, although  the  fact  that  it was conducted  in 
the  vernacular  allowed  more  heckling  than  would  have  been  possible  had  the 
disputation  been  in  Latin.  The  issue  of  the  saints  arose,  as  mentioned  before, 
when  Fabri  attempted  to  defend  the  Roman  Church's  stand  on  veneration  and 
to  answer  the  charge  that  he  had  tortured  a priest  from  Baden  to  force  a retrac-
tion  of  Statements  made  about  the  saints.  Fabri  made  scant  mention  of  the 
charge  of  torture,  but  admitted  that  he  had  examined  the  erring  priest  and 
found  that  he  held  "vil  unbillicher,  ungötlicher,  unchristlicher  meynung"24  as 
regarded  the  saints. Zwingli, who  assented  to  at  least  some  of  the  opinions  un-
der  scrutiny,  stated  that  the  doctrine  of  the  saints  required  clarification  because 
it  has  confused  so  many. 

Zwingli  then  demanded  elucidation  of  the  doctrines  of veneration  and  inter-
cession  supported  by proof  from  the  Bible. One  might  pause  with  Zwingli's  re-
quest  to  examine  what  has  transpired  thus  far.  Apparendy,  Zwingli's  teaching 
against  the  cult  had  been  enthusiastically  received  by  ministers  in  other  can-
tons.  Further  the  arrest  proves  that  the  ecclesiastical  hierarchy  considered  the 
issue  of  the  cult  of  critical  importance.  Zwingli  also  admitted  responsibility  for 
the  erring  preaching,  just  as  he  admitted  that  he  himself  had  knowingly  prea-
ched  contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  Roman  Church.  Here  the  issue  is  the  inter-
cessionary  role  of  the  saints  and  Mary,  not  the  images  which  later  came  to  oc-
cupy  the  central  role  in  Zwingli's  polemic.  Finally,  Zwingli  demanded  proof 
from  Scripture, denying  the  importance  of  the  various  traditions  of  the  Church 
which  Fabri  had  already  cited. 

Thus  in  debate  Zwingli  delineated  the  most  basic points  of  conflict  with  the 
Roman  Church.  Six  months  later  he  published  his  Auslegen  und  Gründe  der 
Schlußreden to clarify  his intentions  once  again. The  preface  of  this work  identi-
fies  its  primarily  pastoral  thrust.25  Zwingli  dedicated  this  tract  to  those  people 
who  have  been  alarmed  by  the  Schlußreden  and  the  reports  of  the  disputation. 
In  this  way  Zwingli's  intent  in  this  work  was  similar  to  that  of  his  sermon  on 
Mary. Unlike  the  sermon,  however,  the  Auslegen is a pedagogical  and  not  a dis-

24  Z  I  50217_18 
25  Z  II  14  et  seq. 

450 

putative  work,  familiär  in  its  tone  but  adamant:  he  teils  his  flock  exactly  what 
they  are  to  believe. 

In  his  gloss  of  article  XIX  «Das  Christus  ein  einiger  mitler  ist  zwüschend 
gott  unnd  uns») and  article  XX  also  on  intercession,  Zwingli  discussed  the  cult 
of  the  saints.  He  notes  that  the  New  Testament  presents  no  evidence  for  the 
role of the  saints as intercessors. To prove  the  contrary point, Zwingli  cites John 
XIV:6  «No  one  comes  to  my  father  but  by  me.»  Having  stated  his  theological 
Position  in  some  detail,  Zwingli  turns  to  the  simpler  people  and  says,  «Nun 
hand  still unnd  hörend  min  that  und  glouben.»26 With  this he  begins a series of 
what  can  only  be  understood  as  common-sense  arguments  about  why  people 
should  cease  to  invoke  the  saints  as  intercressors.  He  points  out  that  it  simply 
makes  no  sense  to  say a Pater  Noster  to  a saint, since  the  opening  of  the  prayer 
says perfectly  well to whom  it is addressed.  Further,  Zwingli  noted  that  no  mat(cid:173)
ter  how  blessed,  the  saints  are  still  created  beings  and  it  is  «verdamlich...  so 
man  die  hoffnung  uff  die  creatur  hat.»27  Such  hope  is  «ein  schmach  Jesu 
Christi.»28 

It  seems  useful  to  understand  the  first  two  stages  in  Zwingli's  attack  on  the 
saints  as  addressed  to  theologians  and  simple  Christians  respectively.  Zwingli 
gave  the  cool  intellectual  reasons  to  eliminate  the  cult  and  followed  with  a se(cid:173)
ries of warmer  emotional  reasons. One  may understand  the  final gloss on  article 
XIX  as  directed  to  the  pastors  of  the  German-Swiss  cantons,  in  which  Zwingli 
explains  why  those  people  responsible  for  the  care  of  souls  must  stop  saint-
worship.  Here  Zwingli  advocates  the  removal  of  images  and  altars  because  no 
matter  how  often  people  claim  that  they  will  not  worship  images  they  inevi-
tably  do  so.29  Nonetheless, Zwingli  noted  that  such  abuse  is hardly  the  fault  of 
those who  indulge  in it. They, blameless, have been  led  by a cruel  shepherd  into 
damnation. Zwingli  makes  it clear that  certain  people  have a God-given  respon-
sibility  to  prevent  vain  superstition. 

Following  this  claim  Zwingli  concentrated  his  attack  on  the  images  them-
selves.  This  tactic  confirms  the  pastoral  thrust  of  the  entire  treatise,  since  the 
images  were  the  most  obvious  manifestations  of  the  cult.  In  this  work  Zwingli 
made  use  of  all of  the  Old  Testament  weaponry  against  the  images  and  deliber-
ately  conflated  the  issue  of  icons  or  images  with  the  crime  of  idolatry.30  He 
again glossed  the  use  of  sanctus in  the  Bible asking, «wenn wend  ir lernen, dass 
sanctus  einen  frommen  heisst  und  nit  einen  säligen?»31 

26  Z  II  1695_6 
27  ZII170s ä_M 
28  Z  II  17229 
29  Z  II  2195  et  seq. 
30  Z  II  1993  4 
31  Z  II  2024_5 

451 

Continuing  along  this  line  Zwingli  suggested  tearing  down  all the  images  in 
churches  so  that  the  people  would  be  prevented  from  falling  into  unconscious 
idolatry.  Set  in  the  context  of  Zwingli's  plea  for  a  comprehensible  liturgy  and 
prayer  this  remark  does  not  seem  as dangerous  as it  might  initially.  Zwingli  ob-
jected  to  images  because  people  are  so  likely  to  abuse  them. Thus  pastors  must 
remove  images  since  they  are  bound  to  interfere  with  the  progress  of  under-
standing  the  Gospel. 

Typically  Zwingli  closed  this  rather  lengthy  treatise  with  an  apology  in 
which  he  excused  the  brusque  tone  and  rough  style,  explaining  that  he  had 
written  the  exposition  to  incite  anger  at  the  godless,  and  stating  that  if  he  had 
caused  offense,  he  was  truly  sorry.  Again  Zwingli  noted  the  effects  that  his 
writing might  have, hoping  finally  to avoid  offense  and  alienation  while  still ac-
complishing  his  task. 

One  can  easily believe  Zwingli's  claim  that  the  awkwardness  of  his  Auslegen 
was due  in  part  to  haste. Zwingli  kept  the  Zürich  printers  very busy  in  1523. It 
was  also  a  good  year  for  disputations;  the  second  disputation  at  Zürich  took 
place  in  late  October,  less  than  ten  months  after  the  first.  While  Zwingli  mar-
shalled  his forces  for this debate  he carried  on a lively correspondence  which  in-
cluded  thoughts  on  the  Mass, and  he wrote  two  major  treatises  published  at  the 
end  of  August  and  the  beginning  of  October.32  The  Mass, along with  the  prob-
lems  of  images, were  the  foci  of  the  second  disputation. 

The second disputation  at Zürich was a simpler affair  than the first: there were 
only  two  topics  for  debate  and  Zwingli's  Opposition  was  meagerly  represented. 
The  events  of the  summer  months  preceeding  the  gathering, however, gave  the 
first  article  of  debate  explosive  potential.  Bullinger  reported  that  this  topic  was 
«dass  die  bilder  von  gott  und  in  h. Schrift  verboten  syind.  Desshalb  under  den 
Christen  nit gemacht, noch geehrt, sunder abgethon  sollend  werden.»33 

The  interest  in this topic  stems  from  the  fact  that  by the  time  of  the  disputa(cid:173)
tion  the  people  in  Zurich's  territory  had  changed  the  mood  of  the  last phrase of 
the  thesis  from  subjunctive  to  indicative.  The  outbreaks  of  iconoclasm  were 
spurred  by  the  preaching  of  Leo Jud  and  others,  as  the  disciplinary  records 
note.34  In  the  Fraumünster,  which  stood  within  the  city  walls,  vandals  had 
smashed  the lamps before  the  altars of the  saints and  splashed  holy water on  the 
ground  in  mockery.35  At  St.  Peter's  Hoengg, and  elsewhere  there  were  demon-

32  On July  30  Zwingli  published  Von  göttlicher  und  menschlicher  Gerechtigkeit;  the 
two works concerning the Mass were De canone Missae epicheresis, an historical sur-
vey which appeared in late August and  De canone Missae libelli apologia, which ap-
peared  in October. 

33  S I 473 
34  Emil Egli (editor) Actensammlung zur Geschichte der Zürcher Reformation,  Zürich, 

1879,  160. 
Ibid,  159. 

35 

452 

strations  and damage. At  Stadelhofen  a mob  pulled  down  a crucifix  which  stood 
on  private  property.36  When  the  Small  Council  of  Zürich  jailed  the  delinquents 
there was a public  outcry  and  so, at the  Suggestion  of  the  three  Leutpriester,  the 
culprits  were  released  on  bail  until  the  matter  could  be  settled  by  disputation. 
The  two  accused  could  have  rested  easy, given  the  nature  of  the  disputation. 
The  Reformation  party  encountered  no  serious  Opposition  and  the  best  argu-
ments  came  from  those  who  wished  that  the  city  would  follow  a  more  radical 
path  than  that  on  which  it  had  embarked  to  date. The  bishop's  representative, 
Conrad  Hoffman,  had  previously  complained  of  the  excesses  of  the  hierarchy 
and  had  sided  with  Zwingli  against  mercenary  service.  It was, according  to  Pot(cid:173)
ter,  «More  a  demonstration  than  an  exchange  of  views,  a  propaganda  exercise 
rather  than  a  debate.»37 

Leo Jud  gave  the  first  scholarly  essay  on  the  subject,  a resounding  condem-
nation  of  idolatry.  Sebastian  Hofmeister,  a  former  Franciscan  converted  by 
Zwingli's  preaching, added  that  not  only  should  pictures  not  be worshipped  by 
Christians,  but  that  they  also  do  not  belong  any  place  within  the  house  of 
God.38 Perhaps the most intelligent comment was made by Conrad Schmid, who, 
after rehearshing Jud's condemnations,39  explained that the images have to be re-
moved  gradually  so  as not  to  alienate  the  people.40  The  only  picture  a  believer 
needs  is  the  one  of Jesus  within  her  own  heart.41  Zwingli  utilized  many  of  the 
ideas  and  most  of  the  rhetoric  of  this  speech  repeatedly  throughout  his  career. 
The  groundwork  having  been  laid  by  his  cohorts,  Zwingli  then  spoke.  He, 
too, recapitulated  the  various  biblical  denunciations  of  idolatry. Yet  he  then  in-
voked  the  example  of Timothy  and  Titus  to show that  «Dergelychen,  sölte  man 
die usseren götzen  nit abweg thün, bis das die inneren  götzen  der  anfechtungen 
abgthon  wärind...»42  Zwingli  assumed  this  mild  position  only  temporarily. 
When  Hans  Widmer,  a staunch  Opponent  of  Zwingli,  suggested  that  the  saints 
present  examples  of  right  living for  the  simple, Zwingli  agreed  but  noted  none-
theless, «zudem wäre Christus unns  allein  zu einem vorbild geben  zu leben,  und 
nit  die  heyligen,  dann  das  houpt  müss  uns  füren  und  nit  die  glyder.»43 

Thus  Zwingli  appears  to  present  a  somewhat  inconsistent  position.  His  un-
characteristic  wavering  is best  understood  as resulting  from  the  pressures  upon 
the  Reformer  from  within  Zürich. The  incident  at Stadelhofen  frames  the  prob-
lem  nicely. The  radicals advocated  the  immediate  abolition  of  all images. Ideal-

36  Potter, Op. cit. 130. 
37  Ibid. 133. 
38  Z  II 691 
39  Z II 699 
40  Z  II 704 
41  ZII7056_8 
42  ZII7106_8 
43  Z II 714, 7 

453 

istic  folk,  unconcerned  with  the  economic  significance  of  their  actions  for  the 
city,  they  did  not  care  whether  a  given  image  was  owned  publicly  or  individ-
ually; any  and  all  must  be  destroyed.  Thus  they  pulled  down  a crucifix  erected 
by  a  grain  merchant  in  his  yard  outside  the  town  of  Stadelhofen.  This  action 
caused  the  perpetrators  to  be  jailed  and,  more  importantly,  it  raised  the  ques-
tion  of whether  Zürich  was responsible  for  the  protection  of  private  property if 
that  property  presented  an  inducement  to  idolatry.  Zwingli's  teaching  appeared 
to  sanction  the  destruction  of  an  idol, which  did  not  favorably  impress  the  city 
government  anxious  to protect  Zurich's  Status as a market  town. Hence  Zwingli 
invoked  the  image of Timothy  and  Titus  to  demonstrate  both  his distance  from 
and  his  disapproval  of  the  «götzenstürmer»  and  to  reiterate  the  importance  of 
action  taken  in harmony with  the  needs  and  best  interests  of  the  populus. 

Another  reason  for  Zwingli's  moderation  rests  on  the  fact  that  to  a large  ex-
tent  the  eyes  of  Switzerland  were  trained  on  him  at  this  disputation.  Even 
though  the  bishops  of  Constance,  Chur  and  Basel,  and  the  University  of  Basel 
had  refused  to  send  representatives,  up  to  900  people,  350  of  them  clergy, 
packed  the  hall.  The  people  were  crammed  in  so  closely  that  they  could  not 
kneel  to  pray.44  Zwingli  had  to  prove  that  although  many  perceived  him  as  the 
spokesperson  for  the  Reformation  in  Switzerland  he  was  far  from  sanctioning 
destruction  of  private  or  municiple  property. 

Zwingli  wrote  Eine  kurze  christliche Einleitung  at  great  speed  following  the 
close  of  the  debates; the  work  appeared  on  November  17. It  was  to  be, as was 
the Auslegen of  six months  earlier, a clarification  of  Zwingli's  position. The  Ein(cid:173)
leitung was also  to  provide  a working  plan  of  action  for  newly  reformed  minis-
ters  and  congregations  within  the  Zürich  territory.  Already  by  November  a 
great  part  of  the  population  in  the  countryside  around  Zürich  was  refusing  to 
take  part  in  the  Mass, where  it was given  at all. The  city Council sent  the  Einlei(cid:173)
tung  to the  bastions  of the  old  faith,  to  the  bishops  who  had  failed  to attend  the 
disputation  and  to  the  university.  This  act  of  defiance  had  less  effect  than  the 
reception  of  the work by the  ministers  in  the  countryside. This reception  served 
to  make  uniform  the  heretofore  disparate  Zwinglian  movement. 

The  Einleitung  reads  smoothly  and  has as its cardinal  principle  the  centrality 
of  Christ  to  Christians.  Zwingli  contrasted  false  Christians  to  those  who  truly 
follow  Christ.  False  Christians  take  matters  into  their  own  hands  instead  of 
obeying  civil authorities. They  burn  monastaries, drown  nuns, and  generally  act 
unrestrainedly  upon  their  own  desires.45  Zwingli  chided  such  actions  as  being 
both  wasteful  and  unlawful:  disobedience  to  civil  authorities  qualifies  in  this 
context  as  a  type  of  sin.  Abuses  are  to  be  corrected  by  teaching  people  and 
gently  leading  them  to  right  action. 

44  Farner, Op. cit. 435. 
*'  Z  II 650 

454 

Zwingli  further  articulated  his  position  about  the  images  in  this  tract. As  he 
understood  it,  the  problem  lies  not  so  much  in  the  painted  or  carved  images 
themselves,  but  rather  in  how  the  believer  receives  such  images  in  her  heart. 
Once  the  person  has  cleansed  her  heart  images  will  not  trouble  her;  on  the 
contrary,  their  «blödigkeit»  will  become  apparent.46  The  real  danger  is  when 
images  lead  to  idolatry  among  the  untutored.47 

From  this  summation  it  seems  clear  that  Zwingli  stated  in  this  treatise  ex-
plicitly what  implicitly  had  informed  his speeches  at the  second  disputation.  He 
clearly wished  to  demonstrate  that  he  did  not  agree with  the  Anabaptists.  Rob(cid:173)
ert  Walton  argues  that  with  this  treatise  and  the  preceeding  debate  Zwingli 
committed  himself  fully  to  the  idea  of  all  reform  being  executed  from  within 
the  State and  under  the guidance  of  the  magistracy.48  The  position  of  moderate, 
guided  changes  in  the  church  was  one  that  civil  authorities  could  sanction  and, 
almost  as importantly,  the  governments  of  the  surrounding  cantons  would  not 
perceive  as  constituting  a  threat  to  good  order  in  the  Confederation. 

Such  political  considerations  began  to  figure  in  Zwingli's  attack  on  the  cult 
especially  after  1523. The  peace  which  Zürich  had  enjoyed  for  the  past  several 
years  evaporated  and  at  the  same  time  she  began  to  implement  her  new  poli-
cies.  In  late  1523  the  Zürich  Council  had  issued  a mandate  calling  for  the  clos-
ing of  the  triptychs, covering  of  images  and  cessation  of  processions.49 The  first 
demonstration  of  Zurich's  new  policy  came  at  the  start  of  the  new year.  In  Fe-
bruary  1524  the  feast  of  the  purification  of  the  Virgin  was  celebrated  without 
processions,  to  be  followed  by  an  especially  stark  Lent  and  Eastertide.  Palm 
Sunday  was  denuded  of  its  procession  of  relics,  nobody  crept  to  the  cross  on 
Good  Friday,  both  of  which  were  long-standing  Zürich  traditions.50 

In  the  face  of  such  behavior,  the  Catholic  cantons  decided  to  call  an  organ-
izational  meeting. The  five  regions, «die fünf  Orte» -  Uri, Schwyz,  Unterwaiden, 
Lucerne, and Zug -  met  for  the first  time  in April  1523 with  the  resolve to  root 
out  the  Zwinglian,  Lutheran,  or  Hussite  heresies  wherever  they  might  exist. 
After  the  summer  months  this intention  became  more  feasible.  Each  Swiss  can-
ton  had  sent  troops  to  assist  Francis  I  in  Italy  except  for  Zürich.  Following 
Francis'  defeat  at  Milan  the  men  returned  to  central  Switzerland  disgruntled, 
unpaid,  and  with  little  loot. Thus  the  Catholic  forces  suddenly  had  available  to 
them  a vast  assembly  of  men  ready,  eager, and  able  to  attack  any  enemy  which 
promised  substantial  monetary  recompense.  Zürich  badly  needed  protection. 
The  Catholic  cantons  looked  to  Zurich's  suppression  of the  cult  of  the  saints 
in  order  to  evaluate  the  profundity  of  her  heresy.  Part  of  this  estimation  de-

«  ZII65719_23 
47  ZII65724_28 
48  Robert C.  Walton, Zwingli's Theocracy, Toronto  1967, 181. 
49  Egli, Op. cit. 186. 
50  Potter, Op. cit. 138. 

455 

pended  upon  the  Christliche Antwort...  an  den  Bischof  von Konstanz  über  Bil(cid:173)
der und  Messe which  appeared  in August  1524 under  the  auspices of the  Zürich 
Council,  although  it  was  probably  written  by  Zwingli.  In June  Zürich  had  re-
moved  the  images  from  her  churches  -  they  had  merely  been  covered  the  pre-
vious  December  -  buried  her  relics,  and  ceased  organ  music  and  excorcisms. 
Such  actions  were  in  exact  contradiction  to  the  Orders  of  the  Church.31  The 
bishop,  consequently,  demanded  an  accounting,  as  did  the  canton  of  Lucerne, 
Zurich's  largest  and  most  aggressive  neighbor. 

In  response  to  this  demand  Zürich  said  that  the  Separation  of  the  Catholic 
cantons  and consequent  dissolution  of the  Swiss Confederation  were against  the 
hopes  and  desires  of  Zürich;  her  only  objective  was  to  prevent  the  Word  of 
God  from  being  shamed.52  To begin with  this  treatise  marshalls  the  biblical evi-
dence  against  the  images. Citing  the  ten  commandments,  Deuteronomy  V, and 
the  eradication  of  ceremonials  by Jesus,  the  author  concludes  that  the  cult  of 
the  saints  is  idolatrous  and  unbiblical.53  The  danger  of  images  lies  in  the  fact 
that  sooner or later the  image comes to be confused  with  the  thing that it repre-
sents. When,  later in  the  treatise, the  Zürichers  confess  the  errors of which  they 
have  been  guilty  in  the  past  and  which  they  now  seek  to  rectify  the  list  corres-
ponds  to  the  cult  of  the  saints  as  it  appeared  in  the  sixteenth  Century.  Repeat-
edly  the  author  argues  that  the  problem  does  not  really  lie in  the  images  them-
selves, but  in  the  use  that  people  make  of  them. 

Whoever  wrote  the  Christliche Antwort  was  in  close  contact  with  the  people 
of  Zürich.  He  knew  what  saints  had  control  over what  problems, «Sant Apollo-
nien  für  das  zanwee,  sant  Erasmus  für  's  buchwee,  sant  Antonien  für  das 
wütend  fhür,  sant Vindelin  ... etwas wider  ze finden,  sant Notpert,  dass sy  helffe 
gebären.»54  Assuming  that  Zwingli  wrote  this  tract,  and  the  humanistic  flavor 
and  tone  indicate  that  he  did, one  can  see that  he  has  changed  his  course  of  ac-
tion  somewhat  in the  treatise. In  previous  tracts he had  called  for  education  and 
then  removal of the  images; in  this work, however, he advocates  the physical re-
moval  of  the  manifestations  of  the  cult  as  a  part  of  the  educational  process. 
Thus  Zwingli's  personal  education  in  the  administrative  aspects  of  actualiz-
ing  the  Reformation  in  his  city  has  advanced.  Previously  he  had  supposed  that 
education  alone would  bring  about  the  elimination  of  false  religion.  In  1524  he 
had  come  to the  realization  that education  would  not  be possible  so long as the 
people  continued  in  their  misguided  course, daily confronted  by the  cult  of  the 
saints.  His  tactics  in  the  Christliche Antwort  reveal  this  newly  acquired  educa(cid:173)
tion:  both  his  pastoral  concern  for  the  people  and  his  strong  personal  feelings 

51  Z III  148 
52  Z  III  153-155 
53  Z III  163 

456 

about  the  cult  are  represented.  He  proved  the  latter  by  his  projection  of  the 
emotion  of  penitence  onto  the  people, who  express  contrition  and  resolve  not 
to  be  swayed  from  their  recently  discovered  path  of  true  religion. 

This  newly  discovered  path  involved  the  elimination  of  the  images  Zwingli 
so  detested.  In  the  period  following  the  publication  of  the  Christliche  Antwort 
several  of  the  territories  close  to  Zürich  removed  the  images  of  the  saints  from 
their  churches. Such  an  action  indicated  that  the  city  or  territory  allied  itself  to 
Zürich.  Potter  manages  to untangle  some  of the  legal knots  involving dual Juris(cid:173)
diction  of  territories, but  for  our  purposes  it is enough  to  note  that  at this  junc-
ture  the  cleansing  of  churches  was tantamount  to  alliance with  Zürich. At  vari-
ous  times  such  cleansing  of  churches  erupted  into  violence;  monastaries  were 
looted  and  burned,  private  property  assaulted.  Zürich  did  what  she  could  to 
protect  those  of her  Citizens actively  involved  in  the  disturbances  from  Catholic 
retribution  while  not  unduly  antagonizing  the  rest  of  the  Swiss. 

Zwingli  was  hardly  idle,  even  in  the  face  of  such  complex  legal  issues.  In 
March  1525  he  published  his  most  complete  and  mature  theological  writing: 
De vera et falsa  religione commentarius.  Zwingli  devoted  Chapter  23 to the  invo-
cation  of  the  saints.  In  this  tract,  once  again,  one  may  note  that  the  focus  al-
though  not  the  timbre  of  Zwingli's  attack  on  the  cult  has  altered.  Instead  of  a 
concern  with  the  use  of  false  images  in  churches,  he  concerned  himself  with 
not  causing  offense  to  others,  especially  the  king  of  France  to  whom  he  dedi-
cated  this work.  Zürich  would  lose  all hope  of  having  France  as her  ally  should 
her  reformation  be  identified  with  iconoclastic  violence.  Another  new  note 
sounded  by Zwingli in this tract is his interest in replying to international critics. 
In  the  opening  of  Chapter  23  Zwingli  referred  to Josse  Clichtove's  work  of 
1523  De  Veneratione  Sanctorum.  Although  Zwingli  claimed  not  to  have  read 
the  work  very  carefully,  this  does  not  prevent  him  from  saying  that  «Nescit  in-
fantissimus  homo  sanctas  non  eandem  rem  esse  cum  divis».55  In  fact  it  seems 
clear  that  Clichtove  understood  this  distinction  as  he  understood  many  of  the 
subtler  points  of  doctrine  asspciated  with  the  cult  of  the  saints. Clichtove  allied 
worship  of  the  saints with respect  for  the  Roman  Church.  He  asserted  that  «Qui 
ecclesiam  audit:  Christurrf  audit,  eius  sponsum  & directorem,  cuius  filios:»56 
Clichtove  has  correctly  grasped  that  the  Lutheran  doubts  about  the  efficacy  of 
prayers to the  saints are doubts  about  the  authority  of  the  Church. This point of 
view, which  Zwingli  shared  with  Luther,  drew  Clichtove's  fire. 

Obviously  a great  gap  separated  Zwingli  and  Luther  yet  by  his  answering  of 
accusations  made  pointedly  at  the  Lutherans  Zwingli  has,  in  a  sense,  placed 
himself  within  Luther's  camp. Here  Zwingli  chose  to  become  embroilled  in  an 

55  Z  III  8392 W2 
56  Josse Clichtove,  De  veneratione  sanctorum,  Paris  1523, 9  recto. 

457 

international  dispute  with  the  respected  Bishop  of  Chartres. Then,  confirming 
what  many  had  suspected,  he  allied  himself  with  Luther. 

Zwingli's  ideas  about  education  appear  clearly  in  his  Commentarius.  These 
ideas  relate  closely  to  the  problem  of  causing  offense,  as  the  following  descrip-
tion  of  his  argument  will  show. True  to  the  pastoral  mode, Zwingli  opened  his 
discussion  by  affirming  that  causing  offense  is  the  same  as treating  others  with 
contempt.  One  avoids  causing  offense  by  careful  and  considerate  teaching. 
Knowledge  banishes  sins,  causes  repentance,  and  ultimately  turns  people  to 
God. Yet throughout  the  chapter  entitled  "De  Scandalo"57  Zwingli  urges  consi-
deration  for  one's  weaker  brothers. 

Interestingly  enough,  Zwingli  chose  the  cult  of  the  saints  as  an  example  of 

how one may accomplish  right, considerate  teaching. Intelligent  and  true  Chris(cid:173)
tians  will  be  prompted  by  their  consciences  to  correct  those  who  worship  the 
saints  but  such  utterences  will  not  convince  untutored  people.  Ministers  must 
handle  these  matters  very  carefully  and  in  such  a way  that  more  are  convinced 
and  gradually  turned  to  the  Gospel  even  if  it  means  holding  back  and  waiting 
for  a favorable  occasion  to  present  itself. 

This  position  represents  a considerable  shifting  of  ground  on  Zwingli's  part. 
Where  previously  the  cult was  one  of  the  two  issues  on  which  he  had  centered 
all of his polemic  and  the  elimination  of which  he accepted  as the  verifiable  test 
of  true  religion, now it does  not  occupy  such  prominence.  Consequently  he  ap-
proaches  the  subject  late in  his treatise. Although  Zwingli  never  considered  any 
manifestation  of  false  religion  to  be  adiaphora,  in  this  treatise  he  deemphasized 
the  importance  of elimination  of  the  saints. When  the  people  become  educated, 
when  they  understand  that  the  Reformed  religion  does  not  threaten  to  cast 
them  to  the  pavement  and  break  their  heads,  then  they  will  adopt  it  naturally 
and  the  whole  problem  of  veneration  will  cease. 

Zwingli's  attitude  suggested,  however,  a  stronger  viewpoint  about  venera(cid:173)
tion, and  this new point of view constituted  the  most  striking change  in his Out(cid:173)
look.  Here  one  feels  that  Zwingli  has  altered  his. position  for  political  reasons. 
He  dedicated  this  work  to  Francis  I, a Catholic, and  declared  that  the  whole  is-
sue  of  the  saints  was, in  a  manner  of  speaking,  too  hot  to  touch. 

It  is difficult  to  determine  whether  Zwingli  has  adopted  this  position  out of 
political  expediency  or  pastoral  concern  about  causing  offense.  In  fact  Zwingli 
appears  to  have  contradicted  himself.  He  claimed  education  is  the  key  to  lead-
ing people  away from  false  religion, yet  he  also said  that  in  trying  to  teach  peo(cid:173)
ple about the  cult of the  saints one  may lose ground  since  people will resist  true 
religion.  This  contradiction,  however,  points  to  his  new  conception  of  educa(cid:173)
tion.  When  one  teaches  people  the  precepts  of  true  religion  one  presents  the 
saving  Grace  of  Christ  as  the  guiding  principle.  Once  people  have  grasped  this 

57  Z  III  888-889 

458 

then  specific  errors  about  saints, the  Mass  or  the  role  of  the  clergy  will  vanish. 
Zwingli  had no  doubt  that  once  people  understood  the  saving message  then  the 
manifestations  of  false  religion  would  wither  away  like  so  many  dead  leaves. 
This  opinion  is closer to Zwingli's  earlier  program.  His return  to  it indicates  the 
increasingly  tense  Situation  of  Zürich  and  the  harassed  State  of  the  Reformer. 
This  tension  and  Zurich's  need  for  powerful  allies  manifest  themselves  in 
Zwingli's  discussion  of  the  relation  of  the  abolition  of  images  to  public  order. 
Given  that  images  serve  no  purpose,  and  that  they  consume  people's  time  and 
money,  and  that  they  often  lead  to  idolatrous  and  forbidden  worship,  Zwingli 
feit  it best  that  they  be removed  from  churches. The  churches  must  accomplish 
this  removal  without  offense  or  disturbance  of  public  order.  Again  Zwingli 
affirmed  that  "Debet  doctrina  praecedere,  imaginum  autem  abolitio  cum  tran-
quillitate  sequi;  docebit  autem  omnia  in  omnibus  charitas."58  This  concern  for 
public  order  tempers  Zwingli's  belief  that  everything  must  Orient  itself  toward 
the  revelation  of  Christ.  Significantly  this  emphasis  appears  in  each  chapter  in 
which  Zwingli  discusses a topic  on which  there  had  been  conflict  with  the  Ana-
baptists.59  Zwingli  repeatedly  affirmed  that  the  bottom  line  for  any  change  in 
religion  is  order  and  avoidance  of  scandal.  He  here  disavowed  any  connection 
with  iconoclasts,  rebaptizers  and  the  like. 

These  repeated  disavowals  and  affirmations  of  the  importance  of  public  Or(cid:173)
der  match  the  growing  number  of  accusations  by various  members  of  the  now 
fractured  Confederation  that the populär disturbances -  most of which are attrib-
utable  to  Anabaptist  actions  and  repercussions  from  the  Peasant's  War  in  Ger-
many  -  were  caused  by  so-called  Lutheran  preaching  going  on  in  Zürich.  The 
arena  of  these  complaints  expanded  dramatically  in  late  1524, at  the  time  when 
Zwingli  was writing  the  Commentarius,  when John  Eck  of  Ingolstadt  joined  the 
fray.  Eck's  involvement  has  a two-fold  significance:  he  made  the  internal  prob-
lems  and  policies  of  Zürich  a matter  of  international  concern  and  he  allied  the 
Zwinglian  party  with  the  sectarians. The  anxiety  which  both  these  charges  en-
gendered,  coupled  with  Zwingli's  desire  to  woo  France,  help  explain  Zwingli's 
desire  to  maintain  his  distance  from  the  sectarians  and  to  insist  on  the  value of 
public  order. 

These  pressures  are  reflected  further  in  the  next  major  tract  in  which  Zwin(cid:173)

gli  considered  the  cult  of  the  saints  and  the  relation  of  abolition  of  the  cult  to 
the  maintenance  of  public  order.  In  April  1525  Zwingli  published  Antwort  an 
Valentin  Compar in  which  he  presented  his  opinions  on  the  locus  of  religious 
authority,  once  again  using  the  cult  of  the  saints  as the  test  case. Compar  was a 
magistrate's  clerk in Uri, one of  the  central  Catholic  cantons. At  this time, when 
Zwingli  would  not  risk  passing  through  any  of  the  central  states  for  fear  of  his 

5<*  Z III 9068_9 
59  specifically  baptism, the  Lord's Supper and images. 

459 

life,  and  when  an  international  Catholic  alliance  seemed  possible,  the  letter 
seems  a  stränge  undertaking.  Nonetheless,  Zwingli  and  Compar  had  main-
tained  a correspondence  for  several years  and  the  friendly,  patriotic  tone  of  this 
particular  letter,  as well  as  its  concise  definition  of  certain  important  issues  ex-
plains  why  it  appeared  suitable  for  publication. 

In  this  work  Zwingli  defends  himself  against  the  now  familiär  charge  of 
impunging  the  honor  of  the  Virgin  and  the  saints.60  He  denies  these  charges 
once  again,  presumably  needing  to  reiterate  his  defense  because  in  Uri,  where 
his  writings  had  been  banned  as  Lutheran,  he  was  accused  of  preaching  insur-
rection,  innovation  and  defamation. 

Again  Zwingli  adopts  the  position  that  the  saints  are  but  a  test  case  not  in 
themselves very important.  In  this context,  Zwingli  doubtless  perceived  that  his 
attitude  toward  the  cult was one  of  the  wedges  driving  apart  the  Confederation. 
He  opened  this  letter  by  invoking  the  figure  of  William  Teil,  "der  gotskreffig 
held  und  erster  anheber  eidgnossischer  fryheyt."61  He  hoped,  it  seems,  to  re-
unite  Switzerland  in spite of religious differences  or at least to gather  allies  from 
within  the  Confederation. 

The  entrance  of  Eck  into  the  disputation  had  indicated  forcefully  to  Zwingli 
that  he  was now  operating  in  an  area  in  which  Zürich  could  not  defend  herseif 
by her  own  power. Whereas  the  Catholic  cantons would  never  have  dared  to  at-
tack  Zürich  directly,  the  wrath  of  Francis  I,  repeatedly  refused  mercenary  sol-
diers by Zürich, and  the  hatred  that Charles V bore  toward  all that he  saw as he-
retical,  presented  the  Reformer  with  a  frightening  prospect.  Zwingli  could  ex-
pect little aid from  the German  princes who saw him as the creator of the  secta-
rians  who  had  done  so  much  damage  in  Southern  Germany. 

Thus  Zwingli  stressed  the  commonality  of  purpose  between  the  people  of 
the  Confederation,  using  terms  like brotherhood,  Community  and  the  like. The 
opening  defense  of  his preaching  appears  to  be a vindication  of  his position;  he 
does  not  want  the  issue  of  the  saints  to  come  between  the  Swiss  people.  Even 
so,  he  choses  this  very  issue  to  exemplify  how  the  Swiss  have  been  duped  by 
the  Roman  Church. 

The  first  point  of  this  demonstration  centers,  not  surprisingly,  on  how  peo(cid:173)

ple  come  to  have  access  to  the  saving  message  of  the  Bible. Zwingli  stated  his 
belief  in  the  accessibility  and  comprehensibility  of  the  Bible. Each  believer  has 
the  duty  to  read  the  Gospel  in  order  to  receive  its  message,  and  she  does  not 
need  the  Church  to  teil  her  what  is  so  simple  and  obvious.02 

Such  an  affirmation  indicates  the  pedagogical  thrust  of  this  letter.  If  people 
were  aware  of  the  message  of  the  Gospel, if  they  would  read  the  Word  of  God, 

60  Z  IV  507  , 
61  ZIV481 3_16 

460 

they  would  refuse  all  false  teachings  of  the  Romans,  including  the  spurious 
teachings  about  the  cult of  the  saints.63 Zwingli  describes  the  interlocking  mes-
sage  of  the  Grace  of  God  and  the  clarity  of  the  Word  with  the  intent  to  teach. 
He  pauses  in his discussion  to  clarify  etemologies  and  he uses throughout  a col-
loquial  style. 

Continuing  in  this  friendly  manner  Zwingli  proceeds  to  detail  why, in  spite 
of  the  goodness  of  the  people  called  saints,  people  must  vanquish  the  cult. 
Zwingli  opens his attack  not  on  images but rather on  the  number  and  variety of 
the  saints.  This  variety  has  fractured  the  unity  of  the  Community  of  believers 
since  each  special  interest  group  has  its  patron  saint.64  True  worship, which  oc-
curs whenever  a group  of  Christians  meets  in God's  name, takes place without a 
multiplicity  of  altars; it  occurs  whenever  people  honestly  throw  themselves  on 
the  mercy  of  God  alone. 

Again  education  provides  the  way  for  people  to  understand  and  attain  true 
worship.  Zwingli  believed  that  once  people  comprehended  the  nature  of  true 
worship they would, immediately  and  of their own volition, abandon  such  man-
ifestations  of  false  religion  as  altars, processions,  and  pilgrimages. 

The  theme  of  this  early section  of  the  letter  is Zwingli's  desire  to  protect  the 
people  from  idolatry,  and  it  is  matched  by  the  companion  theme  of  the  next 
section,  Zwingli's  desire  to  protect  the  people  from  offense  deriving  from  vio-
lent  outbreaks  of  iconoclasm.  The  Reformer  explained  the  conflict  between 
those who want  to destroy  all the  pictures  and  those  who want  to protect  them. 
Although  personally dubious  about the  retention  of  images in churches  without 
the  accompanying  idolatrous worship, and  desirous  of  the  speedy  removal  of all 
such  stumbling  blocks  on  the  path  of  true  piety, Zwingli  rails against  the  disor-
der  brought  about  by  the  "götzensturmer"  party.  He  employs  the  usual  refuta-
tion  of  such violent  impulses: the  important  thing  remains  to  eliminate  idolatry 
from  the  heart  before  one  attacks  it  physically. 

In  adopting this position  Zwingli is responding to the various disorderly  out(cid:173)

breaks  of  iconoclasm  of  the  previous  year.  In  fact  he  specifically  mentions  the 
issue  of  whether  or  not  a  crucifix  constitutes  an  idol,  answering  the  recent 
events  at  Stammenheim  where  a  mob  tore  down  a  private  cross, and  obliquely 
alluding  to  the  unfortunate  Ittigen  riot.65  Yet  in  framing  his  response  to 
contemporary  events  Zwingli  juxtaposes  two  modeis  of  education  which  jar 
with  one  another,  as  happened  in  his  Commentarius.  On  one  hand,  he  states 
that  people  should  remove  images  from  churches  because  they  inevitably  lead 
to  idolatrous  worship, yet  on  the  other  hand  he  claims  that  the  real  idolatry  oc(cid:173)
curs  in  the  heart  of  the  believer  and  all  external  Signals are  irrelevant.  Reconci-
liation  of  these  two  positions  seems  to  me  not  to  be  the  point.  Here  Zwingli 

63  ZIV7810_I4 
"  ZIV1054_10 
65  Potter, Op. cit. 148. 

461 

tries  to  express both  his conviction  that  the  images  are bad per se, that  they  hin-
der  education,  while  he  remains  aware  that  a  too  strong  position  on  the  issue 
threatened  to  alienate  the  poeple  of  Uri  and  to  cause  outbreaks  of  iconoclasm. 
Such  alienation  not  only  threatened  the  spiritual  well-being  of  Uri, but  also  the 
political  well-being  of  Zürich. 

Zwingli  closes  this  section  of  his  treatise  by  refuting  the  idea  of  the  images 
as  a pauperum  Biblia.  He  firmly  believes  that  preaching  presents  the  only  way 
to  teach  the  simple.  Christ  himself  advocated  preaching.  Zwingli  states,  "diss 
hab  ich  mit  vil  Worten  anzeigt  ouch  wider  die,  so  sprechend,  man  erlerne  die 
gschicht  an  der  verbildung  Christi,  das  doch  nit  möglich  ist."66  Such  pictures 
make  the  simple  poorer  but  no  wiser.  In  fact  Zwingli  suggests  that  monetary 
reasons  alone  allow  the  confirmation  of  the  cult  by  Rome.67 

Zwingli  has  reformulated  many  of  his  familiär  ideas  in  his  letter  to  Compar: 
the  unity  of  the  Swiss, the  importance  of  public  Order and  preaching  according 
to  the  Word  of  God,  the  message  of  the  supreme  saving  Grace  of  Christ,  the 
consequences  of  public  education.  The  problems  which  had  come  to  be  para-
mount  in  the  previous  years  subsided  somewhat  after  the  close  of  1525  as 
Zwingli  came  to  turn  his  attention  to  theological  debates  in  the  international 
sphere. In January  1528, however, Zwingli  turned  his attention  once  again  to is-
sues of  local  interest  as it became  increasingly  likely that  Bern  could  be  brought 
over  to  the  Reformed  side. 

The  disputation  scheduled  for January  1528  in  Bern  made  Catholics  within 
the  canton  defensive.  As  with  any  disputation  of  this  period,  the  Bern  disputa(cid:173)
tion  was  clearly  a  partisan  affair.  Berthold  Haller  and  Franz  Kolb  wrote  the 
agenda  of  the  debate  in  German  and  Zwingli  translated  it  into  Latin.  The 
Catholic  representation  was  minimal  -  John  Eck  did  not  attend  for  many  of 
the  same  reasons  that  Zwingli  failed  to  attend  the  Basle  disputation. 

The  ten  theses  for debate  covered  concisely  much  of  the  same ground  as  the 
Zürich  debates  of  five  years  earlier. Again  Christ  is proclaimed  the  only  saviour 
and  redeemer  of  humanity  and  to  this article  it was pointedly  added  that, "dess-
halb  ein  andern  verdienst  der  säligkeit  unnd  gnüg  thün  für  die  sünd  bekennen, 
ist  Christum  verlougnen."68  Article  VI continued  in  this  train  of  thought  and  in 
füll  read: 

Wie Christus ist alleyn für  uns gestorben, also sol er ein eyniger mitler und  fürspräch 
zwüschent  Gott  dem  vatter  uri  uns  glöubigen  angerüfft  werden.  Desshalb  all  ander 
mittler  und  fürsprächen  usserthalb  disem  zyt  anzerüffen  von  uns  on  grund  der 
gschrifft  uffgeworffen.69 

«  ZIV12125_26 
"  ZIV12110_14 
68  Text reproduced in 450 Jahre Berner Reformation  (Herausgegeben vom  Historischen 

Verein des Kantons  Bern, 1980) 152. 

69  Ibid, 153. 

462 

The  seventh  article called for an eradication  of the  images on account  of the  fact 
that  veneration  is  forbidden  in  both  Testaments. 

Although  these  theses  have  a  familiär  ring,  they  also  have  some  distinctive 
characteristics.  Kolb  and  Haller  attacked  the  cult  of  the  saints  directly.  Where 
formerly  the  cult  has  been  addressed  only  in  its  secondary  manifestations  here 
the  authors  address  the  heart  of  the  issue: The  role  of  the  saints  as  intercessors 
for  the  people  with  God. Unquestionably  Zwingli  had  alluded  to  this  point  and 
in  the  course  of disputations  had  voiced  his opinion. Yet he  had  always  avoided 
provoking  a  frontal  attack  on  the  cult.  These  authors  were  well-liked  Bernese 
clerics  and  so were  free  to  approach  the  issue  directly,  doubtless  with  Zwingli's 
approval. 

Second,  and  closely  related  to  the  previous  point,  Stands  the  fact  that, 
according  to  Zwingli's  notes, the  theses  called for  people  to throw  away the  cult 
of  the  saints  and  especially  the  belief  in  the  saints  as intercessors. The  apparent 
boldness  of  this formulation  indicates  how far  the  Reformation  had  advanced  in 
Bern  before  the  disputation  had  begun. The  wording  of  the  first  six articles  fur-
ther  proves  Zwingli's  influence  by  their  emphasis  on  Christ. The  city must  give 
up  the  cult  because  it  threatens  the  unique  role  of  Christ. 

Finally,  in  the  article  concerning  the  ever-present  problem  of  the  images, 

one  notes  a  development  of  the  Zwinglian  position.  Images  are  forbidden  be(cid:173)
cause  they  do  not  exist  except  to  be  worshipped,  and  the  Bible  forbids  such 
worship.  As  Zwingli  suggested  in  his  letter  to  Compar,  the  very  existence  of 
images  in  churches  hindered  the  education  of  people.  Haller  and  Kolb,  noting 
that  images  exist  only  to  be worshipped,  State  outright  "Wo  sy in gefar  der  ver-
erung  fürgestellt,  abzethünd  syend."70 

The debate commenced  on 6 January  1528. The first several days of this volu-
minously  documented  disputation  concerned  the  power  of  the  keys  and  the 
meaning  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Naturally  in  the  course  of  the  first  days  Zwingli 
was  accused  of  having  denied  the  importance  of  miracles,  questioned  the 
authenticity  of  the  Virgin  Birth  and  the  sanctity  of  Mary. 

When  the  disputation  finally  turned  to  the  matter  of  intercession  by  and  in-
vocation  of  the  saints  Zwingli  adopted  a concilliatory  tone, although  he  did  not 
relinquish  any ground.  He  had, early in the  debate, affirmed  the  special Status of 
the Apostles  and  Mary, but  now  he  notes  that  no  one, no  matter  how holy, may 
come  between  the  believers and  God  except  Christ. The  saints  may very well sit 
in  the  Holy  Court  at  the  side  of  God,  but  they  cannot  intercede  for  us  with 
God.71  Zwingli  never  questioned  whether  the  saints  in  heaven  pray;  but  he 
doubted  whether  they  hear  our  prayers  to  them,  pray  for  us, or  intercede  for  us 
in  divine  judgement.  Without  hesitation  he  affirmed  that  neither  angels  nor 

Ibid,  153. 

70 
71  Z  VI/I  405  15_16, 29_34 

463 

saints  can  intercede  with  God,  only  Christ  can  in  any  way  effect  the  fate  of 
humankind.72 

During  this part  of  the  disputation  there  occurred  a caesura, indicative  of  the 
disputors  dislike  of  disrupting  local  custom.  At  the  close  of  the  debates  of  21 
January,  which  concerned  the  lack  of  Scriptural  evidence  for  the  cult,  a  recess 
was  called  for  22 January.  This  day was  the  feast  day  of  St. Vincent,  the  patron 
saint  of  the  city  of  Bern.73 

After  this  interlude,  the  debates  proceeded  apace.  Zwingli  affirmed  his  pre-
vious  position  about  the  images  of  saints: he  opposed  them  because  the  Chris(cid:173)
tian  life  ought  to  take  its  shape  from  the  Word  of  God  made  internal  and  not 
from  images  either  of  God  or  the  saints, which  are  external.74  Zwingli  conti-
nued  with  the  logical outgrowth  of  this  thought: as mere  externals  the  presence 
or  absence  of  images  is a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  believer. 

In  the  course  of  the  month  in which  the  disputation  at  Bern  was held  Zwin(cid:173)

gli  preached  twice. The  first  sermon  was  an  exposition  of  the  Apostles'  Creed. 
This  sermon  expresses  both  the  Christological  emphasis  of  Zwingli's  theology 
and  his view of  the  Lord's  Supper which  would  later cause  Luther  to reject  him. 
Interestingly,  the  position  of  the  saints  in  heaven  arose  in  Zwingli's  discussion 
of  the  real  presence  in  the  bread  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  Zwingli  did  not  deny 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  enters  the  hearts  of  all believers  at the  sacrament,  but  af-
firming  that Christ  is in the  elements  in both  his humanity  and  divinity  seemed 
excessive  to  Zwingli.  For  if  Christ  is  physically  in  the  elements,  "dann  also 
müsste  sant  Gertrudt  ouch  zur  gerechten  des  vatters  sitzen  unnd  im  brot 
sin..."75  In  instances  like  this  one  it  is  hard  to  teil  if  Zwingli  is  mocking  the 
doctrine  of  the  real  presence  or  that  of  the  saints. 

In  this  sermon  Zwingli  defended  himself  once  again  against  the  charge  of 
defaming  the Virgin.76  He also repeated  a frequently  used argument  to gloss  the 
phrase,  "I  believe  in...  the  communion  of  the  saints".  The  "gemeinsame  der 
heiligen"  simply  means  the  Community  of  pious  people.  He  noted  that  even if 
the  phrase  had meant  the  saints in the vulgarly understood  sense, still the  Creed 
says  nothing  about  their  intercession:  "Vom  fürbitt  aber  sehend  wir  hie  nit  ein 
Wort."77  The  arguments  in  this  sermon  are  those  used  in  Zwingli's  other  theo-
logical writings  and  debates. He  clearly believes that  this group of people, which 
doubtless  included  as many  clergy  as lay  people,  did  not  need  to  be  led  gently 
to  Reformation. 

72  Z V I / I 4 0 6l 04 
73  S II  172  note 
74  Z  VI/I,  417  1 M8 
75  Z  VI/L  47024_26 
76  Z  VI/1, 466B 17 
77  ZVI/I,  49026 

464 

Zwingli's  last  sermon  in  Bern  was  equally  strident.  Speaking  directly  to  the 
people  of  the  city, he urged  perseverance  in the good work  begun  in  ceasing  the 
Mass  since, "Kurtz,  es  ist  kein  tugend  ein  tugend,  wenn  sy  nit  mit  standhaffte 
ussgemachet  wirt."78  He  notes  that  it  is  relatively  easy  to  remove  the  images 
from  before  the  eyes but what  really matters  is whether  they linger  in  the  heart. 
In  this  sermon  Zwingli  adopts  the  somewhat  self-contradictory  position  that 
"man  sol  die  götzen  zum  ersten  uss  dem  Hertzen  thün  und  demnach  vor  den 
ougen  dennen"79  while  simultaneously  urging  the  elimination  of  images  from 
churches.  Still  he  continues  to  urge  consideration  for  the  weaker  neighbor  and 
sollicitude  about  causing  offense. 

What  can  one  conclude  about  the  writings  produced  at  Bern  in  1528?  First, 
as Locher notes, "der eigentliche  Sieger wurde  doch  Zwingli".80  Next, one  must 
note  that  the  call  for  the  disputation  was  made  by  members  of  the  guilds  and 
supported  by the  ministers  of  Bern  in  Opposition  to  resistance  from  the  conser-
vative  Small  Council.81  This  pattern  conforms  to  that  established  at  Zürich  and 
it  demonstrates  that  those  to whom  Zwingli  preached,  the  simple  craftspeople 
as opposed  to the  theologians, heard  him. Thus  the  manner  in which  the  debate 
occurred  verified  Zwingli's  perception  of  his  audience.  Third,  as in  Zürich,  the 
organs  of  city  government  shouldered  the  responsibility  for  seeking  true  reli-
gion  by  public  disputation  and  appropriate  action  thereafter.  Once  decided  on 
its  course  of  action  the  Community  reorganized  itself  along  Reformed  lines.82 
Fourth,  Haller  and  Kolb's  theses  connected  the  Zwinglian  understanding  of 
Christ's  role  as mediator  to  the  inappropriateness  of  the  cult.  This  connection, 
while  always  implicit  in  Zwingli's  writing,  now  is  enunciated  with  inescapable 
vigor.  Fifth,  the  issue  of  the  saints  as  intercessors  again  has  come  to  dominate 
the  issue  of  the  images. This  supercession  of  the  image  issue  occurred  both  be-
cause  Zwingli  understood  that  the  people  of  Bern  were  advanced  in  their  edu-
cation  in  true  religion  and  because  the  whole  problem  of  icons  and  iconoclasm 
had  come  to  have  an  unsavory  flavor  by virtue  of  association  with  the  Anabap-
tists.  Zwingli  was  aware  of  how  his  hearers  were  likely  to  receive  his  message 
and  was  careful  to  avoid  alienation. 

Sixth, and  congruent  to the  fifth  point, Zwingli  admitted  that  such  beings  as 
saints  exist,  and  that  they  pray  to  God.  The  implication  of  such  admissions 
looms  large. Zwingli  contradicted  his  own  criterion  for  articles  of belief.  Before 
this  time  he  never  publically  admitted  an  article  of  faith  that  was without  Bibli-
cal proof  and  had  often  stated  that  the  idea of  a saint is not  biblical. Yet at  Bern 

78  Z VI/I, 495I3  l4 
"  Z VI/I, 49520_2I 
80  Gottfried  W.Locher, Die Zwinglische  Reformation,  Zürich  1979, 278. 
81  Dan  L. Hendricks,  The  Bern  Disputation:  Some  Observations,  in: Zwingliana  XIV, 

568. 

82  Gottfried  W.Locher,  Die  Berner  Disputation  1528, in: Zwingliana XIV, 547. 

465 

he  admitted  that  saints  exist.  Either  he  consciously  adjusted  his  teachings  to 
avoid  offense  to  the  more  sensitive  auditors  -  although  he  was  not  so  delicate 
on  other  points  -  or  he allowed  this doctrine  to stand  because  he  personally ac-
cepted  it,  as  Locher  would  have,83  or  judged  it  harmless.  He  would  then  be  in 
the  position  of  affirming  that his own judgement  ought  to take precedence  over 
his formerly  established  criteria of  Scripture. It seems most  likely, however,  that 
Zwingli  allowed  the  doctrine  to  stand  because  denuded  of  images  in  churches, 
and  given  the  clarity  and  certainty  of  the  Word  of  God,  he  thought  people 
would  abandon  it  in  time. 

Finally, throughout  all the  proceedings  at  Bern  one  notes  a growing  concern 
with  public  order.  Zwingli  knew  that  if  he  could  not  clearly  demonstrate  that 
the  Reformation  did  not  lead  to  anarchy  the  city  Council  of  Bern  would  never 
accept  the  Zwinglian  cause. Without  such  acceptance  and  support  by  Bern,  Zü(cid:173)
rich  would  probably  have  been  forcibly  reconverted  within  the  decade. 

Yet  even  with  Bern's  support  Zürich  came  to  take  a  laissez faire  attitude  to-
ward the cult in the course of  1529, especially after  Zwingli's inconclusive  meet-
ing  with  Luther  in  September.  The  Catholic  cantons,  whose  disOrganization 
had  previously  precluded  any  serious  threat  to  Zürich,  began  to  regroup  and 
urged  that,  in  order  to  reunite  Switzerland,  a  majority  of  states  would  decide 
federal  affairs.84  In  spite  of  the  conversion  of  Basel  in  February,  Zürich  knew 
that  a majority  vote would  not  be  favorable  to  her  Situation. Thus  she  suggested 
that  each  parish  or  local  Community  have  the  right  to  choose  its  own  religious 
affiliation.  As  in  the  peace  terms  for  the  First  Kappel  War  in  June  1529, 
Zürich  adopted  a  supremely  tolerant  stance. 

By the  opening  of  1530 political  and  religious  strife  had  escalated  once  again 
and  made  it imperative  that  Zwingli  proceed with the  utmost  caution. When  he 
published  the  Fidei  ratio Zwingli  attempted  to balance  Luther's  increasing  hos-
tility and  Charles' potential  as a political  ally. Consequently  he  carefully  disasso-
ciated  himself  from  the  Anabaptists  and  worded  his  stance  on  justification  so 
that  it  could,  conceivably,  have  been  agreeable  to  the  signers  of  the  Confession 
of  Augsburg. 

In  as far  as Zwingli  treated  the  cult  of  the  saints  in  this  work  what  he  omit-
ted  is as important  as what he  included.  Item  Three  concerned  the  expiration of 
sins: Christ  alone atones  for  sins  so "relinquuntur  ergo  hie cum  operum  nostro-
rum  iustificatio  et satisfactio  tum  sanetorum  omnium  sive in terra sive coelis de-
gentium  de  bonitate  et  misericordia  dei  expiatio  aut  intercessio."85  Notice  that 
Zwingli  has  omitted  the  usual  cavailing  about  the  Mass. He  continued  to  stress 

83  Locher  explores  the  profundity  of  Zwingli's  belief  in  Mary  in  his  essay  on  the  subjeet 

in  Locher Op. cit. (1981). 

84  Potter, Op.  cit.  112. 
85  Z  VI/II  796l9_22 

466 

the  importance  of  Christ  in  all  doctrine  and  practice  of  Christians. Although  at 
places  in  this  treatise  Zwingli  notes  that  avoiding  offense  is crucial, here  he  fo-
cuses  far  more  on  matters  of  theology than  on  matters  of  pastoral  concern. As a 
theologian  he  omits  discussion  of  the  images,  the  liturgy  or  other  manifesta-
tions of  the  cult. Essentially he intends  to win Charles  over to his cause by theo(cid:173)
logy  alone. 

In  spite  of  such  efforts,  most  historians  agree  that  the  Fidei  ratio missed  its 
mark.  If  Charles  V  read  it  he  ignored  it.  The  Reformers,  most  of  whom  prob-
ably did  read  it, could  accept  neither  Zwingli's  doctrinal  teachings, nor  his posi-
tion  that  the  magistracy  was to  function  as the  final  arbiter  and  enforcer  in  reli-
gious  matters.  Luther  wrote,  "ich  bekenne  für  mich,  das  ich  den  Zwingel  für 
einen  unchristen  halte  mir  aller  seiner  lere,  denn  er  helt  und  leret  kein  stück 
des  Christliche  glaubens  recht."86  The  Catholics  also  read  the  document  and 
Eck  published  a  formal  refutation  in  which  he  declared  Zwingli  to  be  a  Turk 
and  the  originator  of Anabaptism,  and  Zürich  to  be  a supremely  profane  city.87 
In  the  period  following  the  Diet  of  Augsburg  Zwingli  became  convinced 

that  the  real danger  to  Zürich  lay with  the  Emperor,  not with  the  pope  or  Fran(cid:173)
cis  I.  Thus  Zwingli  sought  an  alliance  with  Francis  I,  a  long-time  ally  of  the 
Bernese. George  Potter indicates  that  such  an alliance  on the  part  of  Zürich  was 
"not  an  easy  decision"  because  the  canton  had  refused  throughout  her  history 
to  take  part  in  such  a  pact.88  Easily  or  not  the  struggle  with  the  Catholic  can-
tons,  which  had  caused  the  First  Kappel  War,  the  growing  threat  from  the 
Habsburgs,  and  the  realization  that  the  German  Lutherans  were  bound  to  go 
their  own  way  convinced  Zürich  to  appeal  to  France  for  a  treaty. 

G. W.  Broimley  states  that  Zwingli  wrote  the  Christianae  fidei  ...  brevis et 
clara  expositio at  the  request  of  Francis  I who, wary  of  alienating  the  pope,  re-
quested  a Statement  of faith  from  Zwingli. The  monarch, in his request,  stressed 
his  social  and  political  as well  as his  theological  misgivings  about  the  ways  that 
Reformed  religion  had  affected  Zürich.89  Potter  voices  a  different  opinion, 
judging  that, 

Optimistic  to the  end  ...  (Zwingli) seriously  thought  that the  King of  France, about 
whom  he knew singularly  little, or his  sister, Margaret  of  Navarre, could  be brought 
over to the evangelical side by perusal of a treatise, almost a tract.90 

The  truth  of  the  matter  seems  a combination  of  the  two  points. Zwingli  did 
not  compromise  his  fomer  positions  but  he  did  phrase  his  teachings  in  such  a 
way  that  they  would  be  agreeable,  in  as  far  as  they  could  be,  to  the  Catholic 
King. Such  an attitude  is consonant  with  his previously  articulated  desire not  to 

86  Luther, WA XXVI 342. 
87  Potter, Op. cit. 341. 
88  Ibid, 393. 
89  G. W. Broimley (ed), Zwingli and  Bullinger, Philadelphia  1953, 240. 
90  Potter, Op. cit. 395. 

467 

cause offense.  In many ways this treatise  is strikingly  similar to his earlier works, 
yet its tone  is far  less strident. One  hears a very busy individual, stretched  to  the 
limit, articulate  those  things  that  he  cannot  leave unsaid, while at the  same  time 
trying  to  hold  a myriad  of  political  factors  in  balance. 

The  Expositio  is a fine  swan-song  for  Zwingli, encompassing  as it does  many 
of  the  themes  appearing  in  his  earlier  works. Zwingli began  by assuring  Francis 
that: 

Ex his, clementissime  Rex, clare vides, nos neque  divos neque  sacramenta  ex aucto-
rare aut loco movere, ut quidam nobis imputant, sed suo in loco ac dignitate manu te-
nere et custodire, ne quisquam  eis non recte utatur.91 

Carefully  he  continued  that  he  has in  no way ever dishonered  or  disregarded 
the  Virgin,  although  he  admitted  that  he  does  not  allow  her  to  be  worshipped 
in  the  same  way  that  God  is. 

As  is  piain  from  such  a  defense,  the  charge  that  Zwingli  had  defamed  the 
Virgin  dogged  him  until  the  end  of  his  career.  The  first  part  of  the  defense  is, 
however,  more  interesting.  Zwingli  linked  the  sacraments  and  the  saints,  deny-
ing  that  the  saints  are  intercessors  at  the  same  time  denying  that  the  Church 
can  intercede  for  those  who  take  her  sacraments.  Each  believer  must  establish a 
relationship  with  Christ,  because  no  System  can  win  the  Lord's  favor  for  her. 
This attitude  appears  subtly throughout  Zwingli's work  for  Francis. In  a later 
passage  he  denied  his  connection  with  the  violent  church-destroyers  while 
stressing  the  personal  relationship  between  the  believer  and  Christ: 

Legitimumque ergo cultum tarn divorum quam sacramentorem hunc tradimus ac do-
cemus esse, quem  Christus ipse tradidit ac docuit  ...  si vitae sanctimonia  religionem 
ornarunt, nos illorum vestigia imitemur, pii sancti, ac innocentes  simus quomodo isti 
fuerunt...  Hie neque in divorum eultu neque in sacramentorum instituto havetur, ut 
eam virtutem  ac gratiam, quae solius dei est, possideant.92 

Thus  what  one  should  emulate  is  the  saint's  unique  relationship  to  Christ  be(cid:173)
cause only God, not a saint or a sacrament  or the  Church  can forgive  sins. 

Again  Zwingli  has  side-stepped  some  of  the  potentially  embarassing  issues 
linked to the  cult. He  has eschewed  mention  of images or the  changes  in  liturgy 
or  church  architecture  that  would  result  from  his  proposed  elimination  of  the 
cult. Actually  "elimination"  seems  to  be  too strong, for  nowhere  in  this text  did 
Zwingli  call for  the  removal  of  the  images  or  even  explicitly  demand  the  cessa-
tion  of  worship  at  the  altars.  Having  given  Francis  the  groundwork,  he  hoped 
that  the  King  would  be  convinced  that  Zwingli  was  no  violent  seetarian  and 
would,  moreover,  be  converted  to  the  Reformed  religion. 

The  Expositio  exemplifies  Zwingli's  political  nature  and  his ideas  about  edu-

468 

cation,  two  themes  which  have  manifested  themselves  in  all  of  his  writings 
about  the  cult.  The  central  importance  of  Christ  appears  most  vividly  in  this 
treatise  and  it is one  of  the  few  issues which  has remained  constant  in the  eight 
year  span  under  scrutiny.  Zwingli  has  altered  his  position  on  various  other  is(cid:173)
sues, sometimes  for political  reasons, sometimes  because  he realized  that  an  ear(cid:173)
lier  position  was  untenable,  and  sometimes  because  political  events  had  made 
an  earlier  position  untenable.  Thus  it  is  difficult  if  not  impossible  to  separate 
tactical  shifts  from  genuine  changes  in  the  Reformer's  thought. 

An  inventory  of  the  writings  considered  in  this  paper  reveals  four  main 
theses  around  which  one  can  Order  Zwingli's  thought  about  the  cult  of  the 
saints.  I will  list  these  in  conclusion: 

1)  Zwingli's  unshakable  belief  that  Christ  is  the  sole  mediator  between  the 
people  and  God  is outstanding.  This  is the  foundation  of  his  theology  and  can-
not  be  overemphasized. 

2)  Zwingli  wished  to  eliminate  the  cult  because  he  saw  a  close  connection 
between  the  cult  of  the  saints, the  role  of  the  saints  as intercessors, and  images 
and  the  monetary  and  Spiritual abuses by  Rome  of  the  Swiss people.  Frequently 
Zwingli  linked  the  cult of the  saints to the  opressive  System of taxation  or  noted 
how  the  variety  of  saints  fractured  the  Confederation. 

3)  Tempering  these  two  strong  convictions  stood  Zwingli's  need  to  let  the 
people  and  their rulers know  that he was not abusing the  saints -  his sincere  de-
sire  to  avoid  offense. 

4)  The  indications  of  Zwingli's  closeness  to  the  people  pervade  his  writings 
-  his  cognizance  of  their  customs,  his  frustratingly  colloquial  vocabulary  -  and 
these  indications  lead  one  to  admire  his  sincerity  and  deny  the  charge  that  he 
was  merely  a  political  Opportunist. 

Pamela Biel, Department  of  Religion, Columbia  University, 
New York, N.Y. 10027, U.S.A. 

469 

