Cornelis P. Venema

New Studies on Heinrich Bullinger

New Studies on Heinrich Bullinger

New Studies on Heinrich Bullinger

by Cornelis P. Venema

Architect  of  Reformation:  An  Introduction  to  Heinrich  Bullinger,
1504–1575, ed. Bruce Gordon and Emidio Campi, in: Texts & Studies in
Reformation and Post-Reformation Thought, gen. ed. Richard A. Muller.
Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2004.

Evangelische  Theologie.  Zum  500.  Geburtstag  von  Heinrich  Bullinger,

Vol. 64/2 (2004).

Peter  Opitz, Heinrich Bullinger als Theologe: Eine Studie zu den «De-

kaden», Zürich: Theologischer Verlag, 2004.

Heinrich  Bullinger  und  seine  Zeit:  Eine  Vorlesungsreihe, ed.  Emidio
Campi.  Zwingliana:  Beiträge  zur  Geschichte  Zwinglis  der  Reformation
und  des  Protestantismus  in  der  Schweiz. Band  XXXI,  Zürich:  Theolo-
gischer Verlag, 2004.

The publication of each of these volumes coincides with the 500th anniver-
sary of the birth of Heinrich Bullinger. Though Bullinger’s contributions to
the  Reformation  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  especially  the  Reformed
churches of Europe, have long been understated, the comprehensiveness of
the research represented in these studies will go far in redressing the relative
neglect of Bullinger as a ﬁgure of ﬁrst importance during this period. At no
time since the sixteenth century itself has Bullinger’s life and work been the
subject of so much interest. These works, which cover a wide range of sub-
jects directly and indirectly related to Bullinger’s life and theology, are them-
selves but a signiﬁcant part of a growing body of literature on the role of Bul-
linger during the period of the Reformation.

*****

The ﬁrst of these studies, Architect of Reformation: An Introduction to Hein-
rich  Bullinger,  1504–1575,  represents  one  of  only  a  few  modern  English
studies of Bullinger’s work as an «architect» of Reformation. It is particularly
noteworthy that this volume constitutes the «ﬁrst fruit of a formal agreement
of  co-operation  signed  in  2001,  between  the  St. Andrews  Reformation
Studies Institute and the Institut für Schweizerische Reformationsgeschichte
in Zurich» (p. 11). Unlike previous English studies, which focus speciﬁcally

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

119

Cornelis P. Venema

upon one or another feature of Bullinger’s thought, this volume provides a
wide range of chapters on various aspects of Bullinger’s life and theology.
The purpose of the collection is to give the reader a kind of survey of recent
scholarship on Bullinger and to stimulate further research. Included in the
series, Texts  and  Studies  in  Reformation  and  Post-Reformation  Thought
(gen.  ed.  Richard  A. Muller),  this  collection  of  essays  is  divided  into  two
parts, the ﬁrst dealing with «Theology, Spirituality and Ecclesiology,» the
second dealing with «Humanism, Politics and Family.» By treating a broad
range of subjects in respect to Bullinger’s life and work, the authors hope to
encourage students to pursue in greater depth the study of Bullinger and his
place in the history of the Reformation and early modern Europe.

The ﬁrst contribution to this collection of essays on various aspects of
Bullinger’s reformatory labor is a ﬁne introductory chapter by Bruce Gor-
don. In this chapter, Gordon introduces the reader to Bullinger by means of a
short biography of his life, detailing Bullinger’s reforming activity as Antistes
in Zürich and summarizing the history of research on his life and theology.
One of the interesting features of Gordon’s introduction is his consideration
of the question why Bullinger’s inﬂuence seemed to wane considerably in the
seventeenth  century,  even  though  he  was  a  ﬁrst  rank  reformer  in  the  six-
teenth. Gordon ascribes this to such factors as the increasing provincialism of
the  Swiss  institutions  of  higher  learning  and  the  Remonstrants’  appeal  to
Bullinger’s  view  in  the  debate  about  the  doctrine  of  predestination  at  the
Synod of Dortrecht in 1618–1619.

Gordon’s introductory chapter is followed by a posthumously published
essay  by  Edward  Dowey,  «Heinrich  Bullinger  as  Theologian:  Thematic,
Comprehensive, and Schematic.» Slightly edited by Elsie McKee for publi-
cation in this volume, Dowey’s essay seeks to characterize the unique struc-
ture and characteristics of Bullinger’s work as a theologian. After noting sev-
eral characteristics of Bullinger’s theology that are generally acknowledged
among scholars, Dowey offers a critique of the proposals of Ernst Koch and
J. Wayne  Baker,  who  maintain  that  Bullinger  was  a  systematic  theologian
whose theology was organized thematically in terms of the doctrine of the
covenant. According to Dowey, Bullinger’s theological writings are of three
types: biblical commentary; thematic and polemic treatises; and comprehen-
sive presentations of Christian doctrine as a whole. Upon the basis of his sur-
vey and reading of these three types of writings, Dowey offers the thesis that
Bullinger’s  theology  exhibits  several  dominant  motifs  and  is  most  signiﬁ-
cantly set forth in his Decades. Commenting on the Decades, Dowey con-
tends that «the Bullinger of the Decades is Bullinger himself, more truly than
in any other major writing» (p. 6).

The remaining chapters of the ﬁrst part of this volume address a variety of
aspects of Bullinger’s theology. Mark Taplin, in a chapter entitled, «Bullinger

120

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

New Studies on Heinrich Bullinger

on the Trinity: ‹Religionis Nostrae Caput et Fundamentum›» provides an ex-
cellent survey of Bullinger’s doctrine of the Trinity. Taplin notes that Bullin-
ger’s  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  has  not  been  the  subject  of  particular  study,
though some of the characteristics of Bullinger’s theology are well illustrated
in his defense of the classic Western and Augustinian consensus. This chapter
also contains a fascinating account of Bullinger’s defense of the orthodox and
catholic doctrine of the Trinity in the face of the challenge of the anti-trini-
tarians who threatened to undermine the cause of the reformation in Poland
and elsewhere. The next contribution is an essay by Peter Opitz, «Bullinger’s
Decades: Instruction in Faith and Conduct.» In his essay, Opitz offers a por-
trait of Bullinger’s distinctive theology through the lens of what is arguably
his most important theological work. The remaining chapters in the ﬁrst part
of the volume address dimensions of Bullinger’s work that have not received
much  attention  in  the  literature.  Bruce  Gordon  («Bullinger’s  Vernacular
Writings: Spirituality and the Christian Life») treats the subject of «the spiri-
tual grammar and vocabulary» developed by Bullinger to describe the Chris-
tian life. A chapter by Roland Diethelm («Bullinger and Worship: ‹Thereby
Does One Plant and Sow the True Faith›») considers an aspect of Bullinger’s
work that has usually been ignored, namely, his contribution to the develop-
ment of the liturgy or pattern of worship of the Swiss Reformed churches. 1
The ﬁnal chapter in the ﬁrst part of the volume, «Bullinger on Church Au-
thority: The Transformation of the Prophetic Role in Christian Ministry,» by
Daniel Bolliger, evaluates Bullinger’s doctrine of the preaching ministry and
his acceptance of his role as Antistes of the Zürich church.

In the second part of this volume, various non-theological and non-ec-
clesiastical dimensions of Bullinger’s work are investigated. Emidio Campi
(«Bullinger’s  Early  Political  and  Theological  Thought: Brutus Tigurinus»)
presents a study of a drama that Bullinger wrote early in his life when he was
teacher at the monastery school in Kappel am Albis. Campi shows how Bul-
linger’s drama illustrated his interest in the civic community and the need for
public justice in a political order that reﬂects the requirements of divine jus-
tice. The next chapter, «Heinrich Bullinger’s Efforts to Document the Zurich
Reformation: History as Legacy,» by Christian Moser, offers an account of
Bullinger’s life-long interest in history, and his efforts to chronicle the emer-
gence of the Swiss Confederation and the Reformation in Zürich. The re-
mainder of the chapters in this part of the volume describe Bullinger’s in-
volvement with the schools in Zürich («Bullinger and the Schools,» by Kurt
Jakob Rüetschi), his extraordinary correspondence with contemporaries in
the sixteenth century («Bullinger’s Correspondence: An International News
Network,»  by  Rainer  Henrich),  his  involvements  as  a  church  politician

1

This chapter is a revised version of Diethelm’s contribution to Evangelische Theologie.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

121

Cornelis P. Venema

(«Heinrich Bullinger as Church Politician,» by Andreas Mühling), 2 and his
work on the subject of Christian marriage («Bullinger’s Der Christlich Ee-
stand: Marriage and the Covenant,» by Carrie E. Euler).

Even this brief sketch of the contents of this volume should be enough to
conﬁrm that it admirably achieves the objective of the editor, namely, to pro-
vide the English-speaking reader with a broad introduction to Bullinger as an
architect of the Reformation and to stimulate further research into his con-
tributions to the sixteenth-century European and Reformation history. The
inclusion of a selected bibliography of secondary sources also enhances the
value of this collection of essays.

*****

The second of these studies, Zum 500. Geburtstag von Heinrich Bullinger, is
a special, commemorative issue of Evangelische Theologie. In his introduc-
tory essay, Christoph Strohm notes that Bullinger has always stood in the
shadow of his predecessor, Zwingli, even though he served for more than
forty years as the Antistes or chief pastor of the Zürich church, authored a
great number of writings, and corresponded with leading ecclesiastical and
political ﬁgures throughout Europe. The contributors to this volume aim to
enhance our understanding of Bullinger’s life and inﬂuence, and contribute
as  well  to  a  deeper  understanding  of  his  distinctive  theological  position
among the Reformers of the sixteenth century. The broader purpose of these
essays is to enrich our understanding of the cultural as well as theological in-
ﬂuence  of  Bullinger’s  work  with  a  view  to  the  contemporary  challenges
facing the evangelical church. Rather than narrowly focusing upon Bullinger
as a theologian and Reformer of the sixteenth century, the authors seek to
place Bullinger in the broader setting of European history and to consider his
role in the social and political history of the Swiss Republic.

The titles of the contributions to this volume reﬂect this broad interest
and focus. The ﬁrst essay by Andreas Mühling, «Bullingers Bedeutung für
die europäische Reformationsgeschichte,» challenges the older assumptions
regarding the pre-eminence of Geneva and Calvin to the history of the Ref-
ormation of the sixteenth century. Mühling details the myriad facets of Bul-
linger’s labor as Antistes in Zürich and argues that Zürich under his leader-
ship  rivaled  Geneva  in  importance  as  a  theological  and  church-political
center.  A  second  article  by  Peter  Opitz,  «Heinrich  Bullinger  und  Martin
Luther. Gemeinsamkeiten und Differenzen,» describes Bullinger’s indebted-
ness  to  Luther’s  insights  regarding  the  Christological  focus  of  Scripture.

2 Mühling’s chapter is a translation of his lecture that is published in Heinrich Bullinger und

seine Zeit, ed. Emidio Campi.

122

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

New Studies on Heinrich Bullinger

Emidio Campi, in his essay, «Bullingers Rechts- und Staatsdenken,» offers a
compelling  account  of  Bullinger’s  conception  of  the  relation  between  the
church and state, between the ecclesiastical and political dimensions of life.
Campi argues that, by comparison to Zwingli, Bullinger developed a more
satisfactory view of the inter-relation and distinction between the respective
callings of pastor and civil magistrate than was the case with Zwingli. The
essay by Roland Diethelm, «.. . da uebt, pﬂanzt und nerd man den waren
glouben,» addresses the subject of Bullinger’s contributions to the liturgy of
the Reformed churches. Isolde Karle, in his essay, «‹Praedicatio verbi dei est
verbum dei›: Bullingers Formel neu gelesen,» offers a careful assessment of
Bullinger’s doctrine of preaching, which is expressed in this well-known for-
mula.  Karle  warns  against  a  superﬁcial  reading  of  this  formulate,  which
would separate the event of preaching from its context in the church and the
hearing of the congregation, or which would diminish the preacher’s respon-
sibility  to  speak  for  God  in  conformity  to  the  Scriptures.  Heinrich  Assel
(«Bund – souveränes Leben mit Gott im Gebot und Gesetz») treats a subject
that is often discussed in Bullinger studies. Assel’s essay attempts to illustrate
how Bullinger’s covenant view encourages a view of Christian freedom in
life-communion with God and obedience to the divine command. In his con-
cluding essay, «Der Epigone – das Bild Bullingers in den letzten Jahrhun-
derten,» Christoph Strohm presents a fascinating account of the history of
the interpretation of Bullinger’s life and thought. Strohm details the manner
in  which  Bullinger  was  often  placed  in  the  background  in  comparison  to
Zwingli. Strohm argues a plausible thesis that, because Zwingli’s theology
was more amenable to the Enlightenment assumptions of historians of doc-
trine  in  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries,  he  tended  to  overshadow
Bullinger in traditional historical studies.

The diverse contributions to this volume provide a rich mosaic of Bullin-
ger’s life and theology, not only in terms of Bullinger’s contributions to the
reformation of the church in Switzerland and elsewhere, but also in terms of
his broader political and cultural inﬂuence.

*****

Previous research on Bullinger has tended to focus upon particular aspects of
his theology. Special attention has been given to Bullinger’s doctrine of pre-
destination, particularly in comparison to the view of Calvin. J. Wayne Baker
has proposed the thesis that Bullinger, unlike the Genevan Reformer, was the
author of the «other Reformed tradition,» which emphasized a bilateral cov-
enant doctrine rather than Calvin’s testamentary view of sovereign election.
Some  interpretations  of  Bullinger’s  theology,  for  example,  that  of  Ernst
Koch, have treated the Second Helvetic Confession as Bullinger’s principal

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

123

Cornelis P. Venema

theological  writing.  The  limited  range  and  scope  of  studies  of  Bullinger’s
theology have contributed to the prejudice that Bullinger, when compared to
other leading theologians of the sixteenth century, was not a signiﬁcant or
creative theologian in his own right.

In view of the relative neglect of the study of Bullinger as a theologian, the
publication of Peter Opitz’ work on Bullinger’s Decades is a most welcome
development for modern Bullinger studies. Though Walter Hollweg wrote
an earlier study of Bullinger’s Decades, 3 Opitz’ study is, as its title indicates, a
major new consideration of Bullinger’s work as a theologian. While Opitz
recognizes that Bullinger was not a systematic thinker in the way in which
Calvin was, for example, he seeks to offer a thorough study of Bullinger’s
most substantial theological writing that illustrates the distinctive character-
istics of Bullinger’s thought. 4

In the introduction to his study, Opitz provides a helpful analysis of the
state of previous research upon Bullinger’s Decades. In the course of this in-
troduction, Opitz presents a thorough exposition of the context, intention
and composition of the Decades. By means of this introduction, he persua-
sively argues the need for a new consideration of the Decades as the most im-
portant of Bullinger’s theological writings. According to Opitz, Bullinger’s
reputation as a theologian requires a careful and thorough treatment of this
work, which, as we noted earlier, has also been designated by Dowey as the
most signiﬁcant source for any evaluation of Bullinger’s theological system.
Since  the Decades  are  a  collection  of  Bullinger’s  sermons,  which  were
presented to the pastors of Zürich in their prophezei, previous studies have
tended to treat them in an unsystematic manner. Bullinger’s presentation of
his theology in the form of sermons, which are often pastoral in character,
has  often  led  interpreters  to  treat  Bullinger  as  an  unsophisticated  thinker.
One of the great strengths of Opitz’ study is his argument that the form of
Bullinger’s theology does not compromise its theological integrity or com-
plexity. Though Bullinger presents his theology in a homiletical form, this is
in keeping with his convictions about the nature of the pastoral ofﬁce as a
ministry of the Word of God in the church of Jesus Christ. Theology must
serve the pastoral and preaching ministry. And so Bullinger casts his theol-
ogy in a form that serves this purpose. However, as Opitz properly argues,
the Decades are not simply sermons to be preached, but rather extended ex-
egetical  and  theological  expositions  of  the  principal  points  of  traditional,
catholic Christian theology.

3 Heinrich Bullingers Hausbuch. Eine Untersuchung über die Anfänge der reformierten Pre-

digtliteratur (Neukirchen: Verlag der Buchhandlung des Erziehungsvereins, 1956).

4 An additional fruit of Opitz’ study that will be of lasting signiﬁcance to Bullinger studies is

his preparation of the ﬁrst critical edition of Bullinger’s Sermonum decades quinque.

124

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

New Studies on Heinrich Bullinger

Opitz divides his extensive commentary on the theology of Bullinger’s
Decades into six major sections. Each of these sections emphasizes, as a lead-
ing motif of Bullinger’s theology, the «communion» (Gemeinschaft) between
the Triune God and his people that is effected through the preaching and
hearing of the Word of God. By his identiﬁcation of this leading motif of
Bullinger’s theology, Opitz is able to illustrate the correspondence between
Bullinger’s typical reformational emphasis upon the Word of God on the one
hand, and the covenant that God grants to his people through Christ on the
other. Without insisting that Bullinger was a «covenant theologian» in the
sense that the doctrine of covenant is a kind of organizing principle for his
theology, Opitz nonetheless shows how central a theme the idea of commu-
nion with God is in Bullinger’s theology.

The six sections of Opitz’ study follow the sequence of topics in Bullinger’s
Decades, and provide a clear picture of the structure of Bullinger’s theological
thought. The ﬁrst section deals with Bullinger’s theology of the Word of God
(«Gemeinschaft mit Gott im Hören auf Gottes Wort»). The second section
addresses Bullinger’s exposition of the doctrine of the Trinity, which conﬁrms
the traditional and catholic nature of Bullinger’s theology («Gemeinschaft mit
dem  dreieinigen  Gott»).  The  third  section  summarizes  Bullinger’s  under-
standing of the mediatorial work of Christ, which is communicated to believ-
ers by the Spirit of Christ («Gemeinschaft mit Gott als pneumatische Chris-
tusgemeinschaft»). The fourth section outlines Bullinger’s conception of the
Christian life as life in covenant with God («Gemeinschaft mit Gott als Leben
im Bund»). The ﬁfth section describes Bullinger’s understanding of the law of
God and its role in creation and redemption («Gemeinschaft mit Gott als
Leben mit dem Gesetz»). And in the sixth and ﬁnal section of his study, Opitz
presents a sketch of Bullinger’s doctrine of the church as the communion of
the saints («Gemeinschaft mit Gott als Gemeinschaft der Heiligen»).

By presenting Bullinger’s theology in this form, Opitz is able to demon-
strate that Bullinger’s theological interests were as wide as any other theolo-
gian of the sixteenth century. A comparison, for example, of Opitz’ outline
of  Bullinger’s Decades  will  show  many  similarities  in  the  structure  of  his
thought  with  that  of  his  contemporary,  Calvin.  But  this  outline  will  also
show those respects in which Bullinger distinguished himself among his con-
temporaries. Opitz’ thorough and compelling statement of Bullinger’s theol-
ogy also serves to illustrate Bullinger’s historical and catholic emphasis, as
well as the irenic and pastoral nature of his theology. In this way, Opitz is
able to demonstrate Bullinger’s theological sophistication and his interest in
remaining true to the catholic consensus of the Reformed tradition.

*****

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

125

Cornelis P. Venema

The  last  of  these  volumes, Heinrich  Bullinger  und  seine  Zeit:  Eine  Vorle-
sungsreihe, ed. Emidio Campi, offers a number of substantial chapters on
various features of Bullinger’s life and theology. The various chapters were
originally  written  as  lectures  for  a  summer  semester  course  on  «Heinrich
Bullinger und seine Zeit,» which was held in 2003 under the sponsorship of
the Theological Faculty of the University of Zürich. The diverse contribu-
tions of this volume, which range from an introductory chapter on Bullinger
in his historical context to a closing chapter on Bullinger’s writings regarding
marriage,  testify  to  the  breadth  of  contemporary  Bullinger  research.  The
contributions to this volume also illustrate how the study of Bullinger’s life
and thought is now being enriched by research that goes beyond the limited
range of topics in the older literature on Bullinger.

Emidio Campi’s lecture, «Heinrich Bullinger und seine Zeit,» introduces
this volume of lectures by providing a broad sketch of the historical context
of Bullinger’s life and work. Campi details various facets of Bullinger’s work
as a pastor, reformer, historian, and theologian, and argues that Bullinger was
a more signiﬁcant contributor to and theologian of the Reformation than has
traditionally been admitted. The second lecture by Peter Stotz, «Bullingers
Bild des Mittelalters,» examines Bullingers attitude toward the church and
theological tradition of the Middle Ages. According to Stotz, there is evi-
dence of a more signiﬁcant dependence and appreciation for this tradition by
Bullinger than is often acknowledged, even by Bullinger himself. The third
lecture in this collection, «Die Zürcher Buch- und Lesekultur 1520–1575,»
by Urs B. Leu, offers a fascinating account of the book publishing houses of
Zürich, especially the Froschauers, during the period of Bullinger’s work.
Leu’s lecture includes an examination of Bullinger’s own library and the in-
ﬂuence of the distribution of his and other works in sixteenth-century Eu-
rope. The next two lectures included in this volume examine Bullinger’s ex-
egetical  work  («Heinrich  Bullinger  als  Ausleger  des  Alten  Testaments  am
Beispiel seiner Predigten Daniel 1 und 2,» by Thomas Krüger; «Bullinger als
Neutestamentler: Sein Kommentar zu den Paulusbriefen und den Evange-
lien,» by Irena Backus) and treat Bullinger’s work as an exegetical theologian.
One  of  the  acknowledged  features  of  Bullinger’s  thought  is  his  emphasis
upon the catholicity of the church and his keen interest in history. Several
chapters in this volume of lectures address these aspects of Bullinger’s theol-
ogy.  Silke-Petra  Bergjan  («Bullinger  und  die  griechischen  Kirchenväter  in
der konfessionellen Auseinandersetzung») and Alfred Schindler («Bullinger
und  die  lateinischen  Kirchenväter»)  consider,  respectively,  Bullinger’s  ap-
preciation of the Greek and Latin church fathers. The remaining lectures in
this collection treat Bullinger’s inﬂuence upon the Reformation in Hungary
and Poland («Die Ausstrahlungen Bullingers auf die Reformation in Ungarn
und Polen,» by Erich Bryner), his articulation of a theology of «commu-

126

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

New Studies on Heinrich Bullinger

nion» in a time of conﬂict of faith («Eine Theologie der Gemeinschaft im
Zeitalter der Glaubensspaltung,» by Peter Opitz), his systematic theological
interest in the Confessio Helvetica Posterior («Heinrich Bullinger als Syste-
matiker – am Beispiel der Confessio Helvetica Posterior, by Pierre Bühler),
his work as a church politician («Heinrich Bullinger als Kirchenpolitiker,»
by Andreas Mühling), his work as a historian of Swiss history («Heinrich
Bullinger  als  Historiker  der  Schweizer  Geschichte,»  by  Hans  Ulrich
Bächtold), and his writings on the subject of marriage and family («Heinrich
Bullingers Eheschriften,» by Detlef Roth).

The contributions to this volume range widely in subject matter, but they
all contribute to a rich and more complete picture of Bullinger in his time.
Though Bullinger’s work has often been slighted by historians, these essays
present a striking portrait of Bullinger’s eminence during his own day.

*****

We have not been able to give a full representation of the rich and diverse
contributions  of  these  four  volumes  to  the  study  of  Bullinger’s  life  and
thought. However, the publication of these volumes on the occasion of the
500th  anniversary  of  Bullinger’s  birth  does  prompt  several  observations
about the state of Bullinger research.

First, the high quality and comprehensiveness of these volumes indicate
that the study of Bullinger’s life and thought has ﬁnally achieved a kind of
maturity that was not present in the older literature. Bullinger, who has often
been known simply as Zwingli’s «successor» or a «Reformer in the wings»
(Steinmetz), is now recognized to be a ﬁgure of ﬁrst importance to the his-
tory of the sixteenth-century Reformation. Perhaps it goes too far to say that
future studies will begin to speak of Zwingli as Bullinger’s «predecessor» or
of Calvin as Bullinger’s «colleague.» However, the publication of these vol-
umes, and the recent publication or anticipated publication of a number of
critical  editions  of  Bullinger’s  works,  conﬁrm  that  we  are  entering  a  new
period of Bullinger studies. No longer will it be possible to view Bullinger as
anything other than a principal ﬁgure of the Protestant Reformation and the
development of the Reformed churches of Europe.

Second,  unlike  the  older  studies  of  Bullinger’s  life  and  thought,  which
often focused in a limited way upon particular features of his theology or re-
lations with fellow Reformers, these studies exhibit a far richer appreciation
for the complexity and breadth of Bullinger’s reformatory labors and theo-
logical writings. Features of Bullinger’s thought that were largely neglected
in older studies are now becoming the focus of particular attention. As Bul-
linger emerges from the shadow of Zwingli and relative obscurity in com-
parison to the magisterial Reformers, scholars are discovering the remarkable

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

127

Cornelis P. Venema

range of his reformatory labors. Bullinger was a theologian and churchman.
But he was also a remarkable correspondent with leading church and civic
ﬁgures of the sixteenth century. He was also a substantial historian of the
Swiss church and Confederation, whose inﬂuence was formative in many
ways  for  the  social,  cultural  and  political,  as  well  as  churchly,  settings  in
which he worked. The Bullinger who emerges in these volumes is a much
more complicated and contextualized ﬁgure than the Bullinger of an earlier
stage of research.

And  third,  with  the  publication  of  Peter  Opitz’  substantial  volume  on
Bullinger’s Decades, we may be entering a period in which Bullinger will be
viewed as a theologian in his own right. It has long been acknowledged that
Bullinger was an inﬂuential ﬁgure of the sixteenth century. His correspon-
dence with church and state ofﬁcials during the forty years of his service as
Antistes in Zürich exceeds by far that of any contemporary. His contribu-
tions  to  the  development  of  the  churches  through  his  pastoral  labors  and
authorship of the Second Helvetic Confession was also generally acknow-
ledged. Furthermore, Bullinger’s role as a preacher was recognized through
the inﬂuence of his Decades, which served during the sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries as a popular and widely-distributed kind of dogmatics of the
Reformed faith for lay members of the church. Despite the general awareness
of  Bullinger’s  contributions  to  the  Reformation,  however,  few  past  inter-
preters  would  have  argued  that  Bullinger  deserves  respect  as  a  signiﬁcant
theologian  of  the  Reformation.  Bullinger’s  theological  writings  were  fre-
quently  compared  unfavorably  with  Calvin’s,  particularly  his Institutes.
Opitz’ study of Bullinger’s theology makes a very important contribution in
this respect. Rather than concede the claim that Bullinger’s legacy lies in areas
other than in theology, Opitz successfully presents a sophisticated account of
Bullinger as a major systematic thinker and theologian. In Opitz’ volume,
the reader is introduced to a theologian who offers a comprehensive state-
ment of the «catholic» faith of the Reformed churches, and who does so in an
irenic or moderate spirit. The case could well be argued that Bullinger’s De-
cades and Second Helvetic Confession represent the two most inﬂuential and
comprehensive statements of the theology of the Reformed churches in the
sixteenth century. Opitz’ contribution to the study of Bullinger as a theolo-
gian will undoubtedly become a standard point of reference for many years
to come.

It is my hope that these ﬁne studies will stimulate a great deal of new and
careful study of Bullinger’s role in the Reformation of the sixteenth century.
If the quality of these volumes is any indicator, students of Bullinger are en-
tering an exciting period in the history of Bullinger studies.

Dr. Cornelis P. Venema, Dyer IN

128

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

