Amy Nelson Burnett

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the

Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

by Amy Nelson Burnett

In 1842, Carl Hundeshagen published Die Conﬂicte des Zwinglianismus, Lu-
thertums und Calvinismus in der Bernischen Landeskirche von 1532–1558. 1
The book describes the doctrinal strife within Bern and the effects of that
strife on the relationship of the Bernese church with those of Geneva and Zu-
rich. The conﬂicts centered on two issues: the Lord’s Supper, and the inde-
pendence of the church from state control. As the title implies, Hundeshagen
identiﬁed the three positions in the controversy as Zwinglian (as represented
by Zurich and one of the factions in Bern), Calvinist (Geneva and Vaud), and
Lutheran (the dominant faction in Bern during the later 1530s and 1540s).
It  is  difﬁcult  to  overestimate  the  impact  of  Hundeshagen’s  book.  His
analysis of the controversies in Bern has shaped the standard account of the
confessional  history  of  western  Switzerland.  It  was  followed  by  both  Ri-
chard Feller, in the second volume of his authoritative Geschichte Berns, as
well  as  by  Kurt  Guggisberg  in  his  more  specialized Bernische  Kirchenge-
schichte. 2 Hundeshagen’s  account  also  had  repercussions  on  the  histori-
ography of other areas of Switzerland as well, for Simon Sulzer, the leader of
the  party  Hundeshagen  identiﬁed  as  Lutheran,  became  head  of  Basel’s
church in 1553. Sulzer, in turn, has generally been blamed for leading Basel’s
church in a Lutheran direction and away from the Zwinglian heritage fos-
tered by Johann Oecolampadius and Oswald Myconius. 3 Hundeshagen’s ac-
count found its way into the Handbuch der Schweizer Geschichte published
in 1972 and continues to inﬂuence current historiography, as can be seen in
two recent English-language works, Bruce Gordon’s The Swiss Reformation

1 Carl Bernhard Hundeshagen, Die Conﬂicte des Zwinglianismus, Luthertums und Calvinis-

2

3

mus in der Bernischen Landeskirche von 1532–1558, Bern 1842.
Richard Feller,  Geschichte  Berns.  Vol.  2:  Von  der  Reformation  bis  zum  Bauernkrieg,
1516–1563, Bern 1953, 265–267; Kurt Guggisberg, Bernische Kirchengeschichte, Bern 1958,
204–212.
Representative for Basel’s historiography is Hans R. Guggisberg, Das lutheranisierende Ba-
sel.  Ein  Diskussionsbeitrag,  in:  Die  Lutherische  Konfessionalisierung  in  Deutschland,  ed.
Hans-Christoph Rublack, Gütersloh 1992 (SVRG 197), 199–201, and the works cited there-
in. In fact, with Basel’s adoption of Bucer’s concord policies in 1536, the city had moved away
from  a  strictly  Zwinglian  position  a  decade  before  Sulzer’s  arrival;  Amy  Nelson Burnett,
Basel and the Wittenberg Concord, in: ARG, forthcoming.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

45

Amy Nelson Burnett

and Philip Benedict’s history of the Reformed tradition, Christ’s Churches
Purely Reformed. 4

Even after 150 years, Hundeshagen’s description of events in Bern is still
valuable, because it was based on archival material that remains unpublished.
Nevertheless his analysis of the events he describes is fundamentally ﬂawed,
for  there  were  no  Lutherans  in  Bern.  What  Hundeshagen  depicted  as  a
struggle between two rival confessions, Lutherans and Zwinglians, with the
Calvinists stuck in the middle, can in fact be better understood as the ﬁnal
phase of Bucer’s efforts to heal the divisions within the Protestant church and
as the beginning of Reformed confessional formation. The leaders of Bern’s
church in the 1540s were disciples not of Martin Luther, but of Martin Bucer,
and Bern was the battleground where Bucer and Bullinger each sought to
promote their own interpretations of the Lord’s Supper and their contrasting
positions on the relative importance of church unity and doctrinal precision.
Hundeshagen’s mis-identiﬁcation of the rival factions in Bern is under-
standable. He did not have the beneﬁt that modern scholars have in the care-
ful studies of the eucharistic controversy by Walther Köhler and Ernst Bizer,
and he was unaware of the evolution and elaboration of sacramental theol-
ogy under the pressure of Bucer’s concord efforts during the 1530s. 5 The dif-
ﬁculties  Hundeshagen  faced  in  presenting  an  accurate  assessment  of  the
theological  positions  advocated  by  the  rival  parties  in  Bern  were  com-
pounded by the inaccessibility of many of the various confessions and eu-
charistic explanations written not only by Bucer himself, but by other indi-
viduals and groups of pastors during that decade.

More specialized works have not ignored Bucer’s inﬂuence on the devel-
opments in Bern. Historians of French-speaking Switzerland in particular
have been readier to identify the faction in Bern as Buceran rather than Lu-
theran, perhaps because of their sensitivity to Bucer’s inﬂuence on Calvin’s
theology. Other recent studies have drawn on both our deeper understand-
ing of the eucharistic controversy and on the critical editions of Bucer’s Ger-
man works and Bullinger’s correspondence to discuss Bucer’s role in the con-
troversy in Bern. The myth of the Swiss Lutherans is so strong, however, that
despite this sensitivity to Bucer’s inﬂuence on the Bern church and to the
theological  debates  that  divided  the  city’s  pastors,  many  of  these  authors

4

Peter Stadler, Das Zeitalter der Gegenreformation, in: Handbuch der Schweizer Geschichte,
vol. 1, Zurich 1972, 589; Bruce Gordon, The Swiss Reformation, Manchester 2002, 155–159;
Philip Benedict, Christ’s Churches Purely Reformed: A Social History of Calvinism, New
Haven 2002, 55–56. Rudolf Pﬁster does not discuss the situation in Bern during the 1530s and
1540s, Kirchengeschichte der Schweiz, Vol. 2, Zürich 1974.

5 Walther Köhler, Zwingli und Luther: Ihr Streit über das Abendmahl nach seinen politischen
und  religiösen  Beziehungen,  Gütersloh  1924–1953  (QFRG 6–7);  Ernst Bizer,  Studien  zur
Geschichte des Abendmahlsstreits im 16. Jahrhundert, Darmstadt 1962.

46

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

continue  to  use  the  term  «Lutheran»  to  describe  the  faction  allied  with
Bucer. 6

The time is long overdue for a complete re-evaluation of the conﬂicts that
wracked Bern during the 1530s and 1540s. This article will lay the ground-
work for such a re-evaluation by putting to rest the myth of the Swiss Lu-
therans. It will ﬁrst demonstrate that the circumstantial evidence on which
Hundeshagen based his identiﬁcation of Bern’s Lutheran party points more
clearly to Bucer than to Luther. It will then examine the positions on the sac-
rament advocated by those so-called Lutherans, relying on their own writ-
ings, rather than on the descriptions of others, to demonstrate their depend-
ence  on  Bucer’s  concord  theology  as  reﬂected  in  both  the  First  Helvetic
Confession and the Wittenberg Concord as Bucer interpreted it for the Swiss
churches. Finally, it will discuss the implications of the conﬂict in Bern for
our understanding of the early stages of confessional formation in the Re-
formed church.

Before  considering  the  developments  in  Bern,  it  is  helpful  to  review
Bucer’s concord efforts leading up to the Wittenberg Concord and his own
understanding of that Concord. In comparison to the precise formulations of
the second half of the sixteenth century, the confessional boundaries of the
1530s and 1540s were still poorly deﬁned. During the latter 1520s there was a
clear distinction between Luther’s insistence on the real presence of Christ’s
body and blood in the elements of bread and wine and the early Zwingli’s
view  of  the  elements  as  representing  or  symbolizing  Christ’s  body  and
blood. The differences between the two sides became blurred, however, due
to Bucer’s efforts to ﬁnd a formulation describing the sacrament that was ac-
ceptable to each side. Embracing Luther’s concept of «sacramental union»,
Bucer argued through the early 1530s that both parties agreed on Christ’s
presence in the sacrament, although they disagreed on the terms used to de-

6

Like Hundeshagen’s book, Otto E. Strasser, Capitos Beziehungen zu Bern, Leipzig 1928,
122–155, is particularly valuable for its use of the Bern Ratsmanual and unpublished corre-
spondence, but the account is distorted by the identiﬁcation of Megander’s and Ritter’s op-
ponents as Lutherans. More theologically nuanced are Henri Vuilleumier, Histoire de l’Eglise
réformée du Pays de Vaud sous le régime bernois, Vol. 1, Lausanne 1927, 627–653; L. Aubert,
Activité de Farel de 1545 à 1550 dans le pays de Neuchâtel et au dehors, sa participation au
Consensus  Tigurinus,  in:  Guillaume  Farel,  1489–1565,  biographie  nouvelle,  Geneva  1978,
578–591; and J.-V. Pollet, O. P., Martin Bucer. Études sur la correspondance, Vol. 2, Paris
1962, 401–427. The most recent studies have concentrated on the beginning of the conﬂict,
Cornelis Augustijn, Bern and France. The background to Calvin’s letter to Bucer dated Ja-
nuary 12 1538, in: Ordenlich und fruchtbar, Festschrift für Willem van ’t Spijker, ed. Wilhelm
H. Neuser, Leiden 1997, 155–170; and Rainer Henrich, Ein Berner ‹Kunzechismus› von 1541.
Bucers verloren geglaubte Bearbeitung des Meganderschen Katechismus, in: Zwa 24, 1997,
81–94. Henrich quite rightly points to the need for a new presentation of both the theological
issues and the political background to the controversy.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

47

Amy Nelson Burnett

scribe that presence. Bucer saw his role as formulating new terms or concepts
that could be used by both Lutherans and Zwinglians, even if they might be
understood in different ways by each side. 7

The eventual result was a sacramental theology that lay between the two
poles of Luther and the early Zwingli. Bucer had fully developed his concord
theology by 1534, but it was ﬁrst given ofﬁcial endorsement in 1536 in two
different forms, the «Swiss» version contained in the First Helvetic Confes-
sion, drafted in February, 1536, and adopted by the Swiss cities a month later,
and  the  «South  German»  version  contained  in  the  Wittenberg  Concord,
signed in May of that same year and elaborated by Bucer in various docu-
ments intended for the Swiss churches.

The First Helvetic Confession was the ﬁrst common confession of the
Swiss churches, and it contained some essential features of Bucer’s concord
theology in embryonic form. It stated that the sacraments were not empty
signs but joined two things, the sign and the thing signiﬁed. Accordingly, the
Lord’s Supper was comprised not only of the signs of bread and wine, but
also that which was «essential and spiritual.» In the Supper, «the Lord truly
offers his body and blood, that is, himself, to his own.» The confession re-
jected any local inclusion or carnal presence of the Lord’s body and blood.
Rather, «through the institution of the Lord, bread and wine are symbols
through which the true communion of his body and blood are exhibited by
the Lord himself through the ministry of the church.» The key term was the
verb exhibere and its variants exhibitiva and exhibentes. These were trans-
lated into German as darreichen and anbieten (to offer or present), but the
Latin term goes beyond its English cognate, «to exhibit (or present),» to in-
clude the sense of «to deliver or procure.» 8

The First Helvetic Confession was an important statement for the Swiss
who  accepted  Bucer’s  concord  efforts,  because  although  Luther  disliked

7

8

48

For a careful discussion and analysis of Bucer’s early concord efforts, see Wilhelm H. Neuser,
Martin Bucer als Mittler im Abendmahlsstreit (1530/31), in: Kaum zu glauben. Von der Hä-
resie und dem Umgang mit ihr, ed. Athina Lexutt and Vicco von Bülow, Rheinbach 1998,
140–161.
Latin and German versions of the First Helvetic Confession in Philip Schaff, ed., The Creeds
of  Christendom,  with  a  History  and  Critical  Notes,  Vol.  3:  The  Evangelical  Protestant
Creeds, with Translations, New York 1905, 211–231; article 21 on the power and efﬁcacy of
the sacraments and article 23 on the Eucharist, 223–227. Cf. Charlton T. Lewis and Charles
Short, A Latin Dictionary, Oxford 1879, 685. See also David Wright’s comment on Bucer’s
use of exhibere, Infant Baptism and the Christian Community in Bucer, in: Martin Bucer: Re-
forming Church and Community, ed. David F. Wright, Cambridge 1994, 95–106. On the
background to the First Helvetic Confession (Confessio Helvetica Prior, sometimes known
as  the  Second  Basel  Confession),  Bizer,  Studien,  91–92,  and  Köhler,  Zwingli  und  Luther,
412–416. Köhler describes the article on the Lord’s Supper as falling into two parts, the ﬁrst
inserted by the Strasbourgers to give a Lutheran «tone» to the more clearly Zwinglian posi-
tion of the second half, 415.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

some of the wording, he gave it his grudging approval when it was presented
to him in May. Despite reservations on both sides, it was thus the closest that
the  two  parties  came  to  a  mutually  acceptable  statement  on  the  Lord’s
Supper. Nevertheless, it was eclipsed in importance by the Wittenberg Con-
cord, which was the ultimate achievement of the meeting between represen-
tatives of the south German churches and Luther. The Wittenberg Concord
made further concessions to Luther, but Bucer’s various explanations written
for the Swiss churches reveal how he understood the wording of the Con-
cord as compatible with the First Helvetic Confession. 9

The contents of the Concord, as interpreted by Bucer for the Swiss, can be
summarized under four points. First, in the Lord’s Supper things both spiri-
tual and material, or heavenly and earthly, are joined together in sacramental
union. This distinction between «things heavenly and earthly» in the sacra-
ment paralleled the more traditional terminology of the First Helvetic Con-
fession, which spoke of the sign and the thing signiﬁed. As a corollary of this
point, the Wittenberg Concord explicitly rejected transubstantiation and the
local inclusion of Christ’s body and blood in the bread and wine. In his ex-
planation of the Concord, Bucer also rejected the other extreme, the belief
that the sacrament contained only the symbols of bread and wine. 10

Second, Christ’s body and blood are truly and substantially present, of-
fered (dargereicht/exhiberi), and received with the bread and wine. In his ex-
planation of this article written speciﬁcally for Basel’s pastors, Bucer identi-
ﬁed this position with the statement of the First Helvetic Confession that
Christ’s  body  and  blood  are  truly  offered  to  his  own  in  the  Supper.  The
wording of the Wittenberg Concord clearly went beyond that of the First
Helvetic Confession, and Bullinger, for one, never accepted either the terms
«substantially» or «exhibited.» For Bucer and his Swiss supporters, however,
the wording of both the First Helvetic Confession and the Wittenberg Con-
cord taught the same underlying truth: that Christ was truly present and re-
ceived in the sacrament by the faithful. As he explained in the wake of the
Concord, one need not worry about terms such as «essential,» «bodily,» and

9 On the Wittenberg Concord, Bizer, Studien, 96–117; Köhler, Zwingli und Luther, 432–455.
Luther’s reluctant endorsement of the First Helvetic Confession came after the Concord had
been signed by both sides, Martin Bucers Deutsche Schriften, Gütersloh 1960 ff. [hereafter
BDS], 6/1: 170–171; in a letter to Bucer, Luther was much less positive, stating that the First
Helvetic Confession pleased him less than the Tetrapolitan Confession, especially with re-
gard  to  the  article  on  the  Lord’s  Supper,  WA  Br  8:  157–8,  no.  3193;  cf.  Hans Grass,  Die
Abendmahlslehre  bei  Luther  und  Calvin.  Eine  kritische  Untersuchung,  Gütersloh  1954,
166–167.

10 BDS 6/1: 209–210; 220; 232–234; 249–250.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

49

Amy Nelson Burnett

the like, as long as one held to the truth that the bread and the wine were the
true communion of Christ’s body and blood, and not empty signs. 11

Third, the Wittenberg Confession stated that Christ’s body and blood are
received by the worthy and the unworthy alike. Bucer discussed this point at
some length in his explanation of the Concord, pointing out that the un-
worthy (indigni) were not the same as the impious (impii), or those with no
faith. The unworthy ate judgment upon themselves along with Christ’s body
and blood. The impious, however, received only bread and wine. In this way
Bucer preserved the Swiss insistence that faith was necessary for reception of
the beneﬁts of the sacrament. 12

Lastly, the Wittenberg Concord studiously avoided the issue of Christol-
ogy, and speciﬁcally the question of how Christ’s truly human body could be
truly present in the sacrament if it was at the right hand of the Father in
heaven. This fundamental objection of Zwingli to the Lutheran understand-
ing of the sacrament could not so easily be swept under the carpet, and so
Bucer was forced to address it in his further exchanges with the Swiss. His re-
sponse  on  this  issue  was  a  rejection  of  human  speculation.  The  union  of
Christ’s  body  and  blood  with  the  elements  could  not  be  understood  by
human reason but could only be acknowledged by the believing mind. Ulti-
mately, however, Bucer answered the Christological question by arguing that
«heaven» should be understood not as a place but as a condition, and there-
fore  the  argument  that  Christ’s  human  body  was  limited  to  one  place  in
heaven was in fact invalid. 13

When interpreted according to Bucer’s explanation, the Wittenberg Con-
cord allowed for signiﬁcant deviation from Luther’s own understanding of
the Lord’s Supper. Its silence or vagueness regarding the three points that
would separate Lutheran from Reformed over the third quarter of the cen-
tury – manducatio oralis, manducatio impiorum, and the doctrine of ubiquity
–  made  it  acceptable  to  many  whose  views  lay  between  the  two  poles  of
Luther’s  real  presence  and  Zwingli’s  symbolic  view  of  the  Lord’s  Supper.
Luther’s acceptance of the Concord, even with Bucer’s explanation, marked
the  greatest  degree  of  openness  that  the  Wittenberg  reformer  would  ever
show towards an understanding of the sacrament that differed from his own.
Within seven years, Luther had backed away from this openness, claiming

11 BDS 6/1: 210; 219–221; 249; 285–286.
12 BDS 6/1: 213–214; 223; 254–256.
13 Neither the Concord itself nor any of Bucer’s defenses of the Concord contain any discussion
of the location of Christ’s truly human body. Bucer did cite Zwingli’s rejection of the ubiqui-
ty of Christ’s body as evidence that the Zurich reformer rejected the oral manducation of
Christ’s body, which Bucer also rejected, BDS 6/1: 243–244. On the limits of human reason,
see the confession of Bucer and Capito at the Bern synod of Sept. 1537, BDS 6/1: 297, and
most clearly in Bucer’s letter to Johannes Comander of Oct., 1539, BDS 8: 349–400.

50

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

(wrongly) that he had forced the south Germans to accept both oral mandu-
cation and reception by those without faith. 14

Luther’s rejection of Bucer’s position lay in the future, however, and in
1536 the great question facing the Swiss theologians was whether they could
accept Bucer’s concord theology. Thanks to Zurich’s opposition, Bucer’s ef-
forts ultimately failed in Switzerland, but Zurich’s ﬁnal victory was not a
foregone conclusion. In the later 1530s and through the 1540s Bucer’s con-
cord theology was supported actively by Basel and passively by Vadian and
the St. Gallen church, and it was vigorously promoted in Bern by the party
misleadingly labeled «Lutheran.» 15

The eucharistic conﬂict in Bern began in the spring of 1537, when the
theology professor Kaspar Megander and the pastor Erasmus Ritter attacked
their colleague Sebastian Meyer for preaching that «the body of Christ was
present in the Supper in some ineffable way, and that his true body was eaten
and his blood drunk, but he did not teach who ate [them] and in what way.» 16
Another of Bern’s ﬁve pastors, Peter Kunz, defended Meyer, and the battle
lines were drawn that would last for over a decade. A synod held in May re-
sulted in Meyer’s censure, but the conﬂict continued, and in September a sec-
ond synod was held for all of the urban and rural clergy. This time Martin
Bucer and Wolfgang Capito came to the city to settle the quarrel, accompa-
nied by Oswald Myconius and Simon Grynaeus from Basel.

Despite  an  initially  unpromising  situation,  the  Strasbourg  theologians
succeeded in persuading Bern’s clergy to unite behind a confession on the
Lord’s Supper. The Strasbourgers’ confession taught that «all of those who
are in the congregation, approach the table, and receive the holy sacrament
and do not pervert the Lord’s word, but who believe it and celebrate it ac-
cording to the Lord’s institution, truly receive and eat the true body and the
true blood of Christ together with the visible signs .. . not as a perishable

14

If Luther had been unaware of Bucer’s understanding of the Wittenberg Concord, he was cer-
tainly informed about it when he received a copy of Bucer’s explanation that was sent along
with a statement of the Swiss churches in Jan., 1537; Bizer, Studien, 164–166. For a discussion
of Luther’s interpretation of the Concord and the differences between Luther and Bucer, see
Grass, Abendmahlslehre, 139–165.

15 On Basel, Burnett, Basel and the Wittenberg Concord; on Vadian’s support for Bucer’s con-
cord efforts in 1536, Ernst Gerhard Rüsch, Im Ringen um die Glaubenseinigkeit. Vadians
Brief an Bullinger vom 2. November 1536, in: Zwa 16, 1983, 19–34.

16 The conﬂict and its immediate repercussions are described in a letter of the Bern ministers to
the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  Thunstetten,  14  May  1537,  Zürich  Zentralbibliothek  [hereafter
ZZB] (Simlersche Sammlung), Ms S 43: 23: «Etenim cum pro concione sacra dixisset, corpus
Christi ineffabili quodam modo in coena esse, veramque ejus carnem in illa edi, et sanguinem
ejus bibi, non tamen interea docens, quis et quo pacto ederet .. .» Megander and Ritter wanted
Meyer to be more clear that only the faithful could receive the body and blood of Christ in
the Supper.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

51

Amy Nelson Burnett

food for the stomach, but as food for the soul to eternal life.» It should be
noted that while this confession clearly went beyond Zwingli’s symbolic and
representational view of the sacrament, it was by no means a full endorse-
ment either of Luther’s own eucharistic theology or of the Lutheran position
contained in the Augsburg Confession. It could be called Lutheran only in
the sense that it accorded with the Wittenberg Concord, which Luther had
accepted. 17

During  the  synod  Bucer  had  criticized  the  Zwinglian  statements  con-
tained in the catechism Megander had written for Bern. Before the outside
theologians left the city, they modiﬁed the catechism’s text to bring it into ac-
cord  with  the  documents  now  recognized  as  authoritative  for  the  Bern
church: not only the ten theses of the 1528 disputation, but also the summary
of doctrine written by Capito and adopted at the Bern synod of 1532, the
First Helvetic Confession, and the joint letter of the Swiss churches sent to
Luther in early 1537 in response to the Wittenberg Concord. The numerous
small changes made to the catechism emphasized more clearly that the sacra-
ment was not merely a sign but actually conveyed what it represented, the
communion of Christ’s body and blood. 18

Although  Megander  participated  in  the  revision  process,  he  objected
loudly to the publication of the revised text. As a consequence, the Bern Sen-
ate relieved him of his post, and he returned to Zurich in the spring of 1538. A
few months later he was followed by the professor Johannes Rhellikan, an-
other of the staunch Zwinglians in the city. Ritter remained as the sole de-
fender of Zwinglian theology in Bern through the mid-1540s, when he was
joined by deacon Johannes Wäber, a fervent Zwinglian who had been a pas-
tor in Aarau. When Ritter died in 1546, he was succeeded by Jodocus Kirch-
meyer,  another  outspoken  Zwinglian  who  had  served  the  church  of  Küs-
nacht.  Meanwhile,  the  so-called  Lutheran  party  was  strengthened  by  the
addition of Simon Sulzer, who succeeded Megander as theology professor in
the early summer of 1538. From his arrival, Sulzer helped the city’s pastors
with their preaching duties, and by 1541 he had been promoted to a pastoral
post. Two deacons who served the church during the later 1530s and into the
1540s, Paul Strasser and Conrad Schmidt, also allied themselves with Meyer,

17 Both the Latin and German versions of the Strasbourgers’ confession in BDS 6/1: 294–299;
citation from the German text, 295–297. Hundeshagen gives a detailed description of the two
synods of May and September, Conﬂicte, 74–89. Brian Gerrish has called Zwingli’s euchari-
stic teaching «symbolic memorialism»; Sign and Reality: The Lord’s Supper in the Reformed
Confessions, in: The Old Protestantism and the New: Essays on the Reformation Heritage,
Chicago 1982, 118–130.

18 Henrich describes both the conﬂict over the catechism and discusses the changes made to its
text; see also BDS 6/3: 266–269. The letter of the Swiss cities to Luther was dated 12 Jan. 1537;
WA Br 12: 241–275, no. 4268, with accompanying documentation.

52

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

Kunz, and Sulzer. When Meyer left Bern in 1541, Sulzer assumed leadership
of this faction, and Beat Gerung, the pastor sent from Strasbourg to replace
Meyer, became his most outspoken supporter. 19

There  is  no  question  about  the  commitment  of  Megander,  Rhellikan,
Ritter, and Kirchmeyer to the Zwinglian interpretation of the Lord’s Supper.
If anything, they were even more faithful to Zwingli’s original symbolic and
representational view of the Lord’s Supper than were the Zurich theologians
led by Heinrich Bullinger. The theological convictions of their opponents are
more difﬁcult to determine, because they are buried in unpublished letters
and  confessions  scattered  between  Bern,  Zurich  and  Basel.  Hundeshagen
identiﬁed  them  as  Lutherans  primarily  on  the  basis  of  circumstantial  evi-
dence. That evidence can be summarized under three points. First and most
obviously, they were called Lutherans by their Zwinglian opponents in the
city,  and  they  clearly  opposed  the  radical  Zwinglianism  upheld  by  Ritter
after the departure of Megander and Rhellikan. Second, they defended prac-
tices that were retained by the Lutherans but had been rejected by Zwingli.
Third,  Hundeshagen  pointed  to  their  personal  contacts  with  Luther  him-
self. 20 Hundeshagen’s characterization of these men as Lutherans can be chal-
lenged on each of these points, and in each case the evidence points more
strongly to Bucer than to Luther as their chief theological inﬂuence.

Hundeshagen could certainly justify his use of the term «Lutheran» on
the basis of his sources, for contemporary accounts of the eucharistic strife in
Bern used the term as well. Both Rhellikan and Eberhard von Rümlang, a
staunch Zwinglian who was Bern’s Seckelschreiber, referred to their oppo-
nents  as  «Lutheranizers»  or  «Lutherans.»  However,  Hundeshagen  over-
looked the fact that Bern’s Zwinglian party used «Lutheran» more as a po-
lemical term to discredit those who disagreed with them than as a precise
characterization of their opponents’ eucharistic theology. In fact, both Rhel-
likan  and  von  Rümlang  clearly  recognized  the  dependence  of  their  «Lu-
theran»  opponents  on  Bucer’s  theology,  and  the  correspondence  between
Bern and Zurich referred much more often to the «Bucerans» than it did to
the «Lutherans.» Signiﬁcantly, at the point when Bern’s Zwinglians appealed
to Zurich for support against their opponents in the fall of 1537, they said

19 Hundeshagen mentions Strasser and Schmidt as deacons in the spring of 1540, Conﬂicte, 107.
Strasser was transferred to Burgdorf in early 1542; cf. Bern Staatsarchiv [heareafter BeStA]
DQ 11 (Michael Stettler’s Berner Chronik), Bd. D: 1541–50, fo. 25r-v. He matriculated in Ba-
sel in 1546/47 and became a pastor in Basel’s rural church in 1548; Die Matrikel der Univer-
sität Basel, vol. 2., ed. Hans Georg Wackernagel, Basel 1956, 48, which does not mention his
tenure as deacon in the city of Bern. Even less is known about Schmidt. He was removed
from ofﬁce in 1548, along with Sulzer and Gerung.

20 Hundeshagen, Conﬂicte, 70, 105–107.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

53

Amy Nelson Burnett

nothing about Luther but described in vivid terms the epidemic of «Bucer-
anism» that was infecting the Bern church. 21

Hundeshagen’s statement that the Bernese «Lutherans» advocated those
practices that distinguished Lutherans from Zwinglians is also problematic. 22
While  the  Lutheran  and  Zwinglian  Reformations  were  certainly  distin-
guished by their differing attitudes towards the retention of traditional prac-
tices, one cannot assume that those who differed from the Zwinglian position
were necessarily Lutheran. Certainly, no one could question Bern’s adher-
ence to Zwinglian doctrine when it adopted the Reformation in 1528. Never-
theless, the city was more conservative than was Zurich with regard to the re-
tention  of  many  traditional  practices.  For  instance,  it  retained  the  use  of
oblates rather than leavened bread in communion into the seventeenth cen-
tury, long after the «fractio panis» had become a point of controversy be-
tween Lutherans and Reformed in the Empire. 23 Hundeshagen, however, at-
tributed the complete breakdown in relations at the end of 1537 between
Kunz on one side and Calvin and Farel on the other to Kunz’s awareness that
the  rigorism  of  Geneva’s  church  «opposed  the  practices  of  the  Saxon
churches.» 24 It is much more plausible to regard Kunz as a defender of Bern’s
own traditions than as an advocate of what was done in far distant Saxony.
Moreover, the conﬂict between Kunz and the Genevan reformers can be ex-
plained just as easily by personal animosity as by deeper theological differ-
ences. Presenting his side of the conﬂict, Calvin highlighted Kunz’ personal-
ity and his conduct, not his theology, and even Kunz’ defenders described
him as having «peasant manners.» 25

Hundeshagen’s original mistake in attributing Kunz’ hostility to Calvin

21

«Lutheranizers» in Rhellikan to Bullinger, 26 March, 1538, HBBW 8: 112, no. 1116; cf. Rhel-
likan’s  reference  to  the  «Bucerans,»  in  a  letter  to  Bullinger  of  21  Aug.,  1537,  HBBW 7:
220–222, no. 1032. Eberhard von Rümlang wrote of the «Lutherans» to Bullinger, 20 Oct.,
1539, A.-L. Herminjard, Correspondance des Réformateurs dans les pays de langue Françai-
se, Geneva 1866–1897, 6: 79–81, no. 829 and used the terms «Lutheran» and «Buceran» syn-
onymously, to Bullinger, 7 Dec. 1545, Zürich Staatsarchiv [hereafter ZStA] E II 345, 306; on
the epidemic of «Buceranism,» see the letter of Bern’s pastors and teachers to Zurich, 28 Nov.
1537, HBBW 7: 317–23, no. 1074.

22 Hundeshagen accused Sulzer in particular of placing himself on the side of Luther «in almost
everything on which the Lutheran Reformation deviated from the Zwinglian», Conﬂicte,
106–7.

23 Although there were attempts to eliminate the oblates in the 1580s, Bern retained them until
1605; Guggisberg, Bernische Kirchengeschichte, 276–277, 334–335; cf. Bodo Nischan, The
«Fractio Panis»: A Reformed Communion Practice in Late Reformed Germany, in: Church
History 53, 1984, 17–29.

24 Hundeshagen, Conﬂicte, 130.
25

«Mores rusticos», Simon Grynaeus to Calvin and Farel, 4 Mar. 1538, CO 10: 158–61, no. 97;
cf.  Calvin  to  Bucer,  12  Jan.  1538,  CO 10:  137–44,  no.  87;  Calvin  and  Farel  to  Bullinger,
CO 10: 203–9, no. 121.

54

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

to  his  supposedly  Lutheran  convictions  led  him  into  the  second  error  of
seeing the later alliance between the French-speaking Reformers and Bern’s
«Lutherans» as a tactical move, rather than one that grew out of similar theo-
logical concerns. 26 Through the 1540s, Sulzer consistently supported the ef-
forts of Pierre Viret and the Lausanne church to defend the independence of
the ministry and the exercise of church discipline. It was due to this support,
rather than to their understanding of the Lord’s Supper, that the so-called
Lutherans were removed from ofﬁce in 1548. In fact, Sulzer’s defense of the
Lausanne church indicates that on the issue of church governance he, like
Calvin, had been inﬂuenced by Bucer.

Hundeshagen was well aware of the theological similarities between Cal-
vin and Sulzer, but he was so convinced of the Lutheran convictions of the
latter that he downplayed those similarities and distorted their differences.
On the one hand, he admitted that Calvin, like Sulzer, could accept «Lu-
theran»  practices  such  as  the  pre-communion  examination  and  adminis-
tration of the Lord’s Supper to the sick that were rejected by other Swiss
churches. He did not, however, accuse Calvin of being a Lutheran for en-
dorsing these practices, although this was part of his justiﬁcation for calling
Sulzer a Lutheran. On the other hand, Hundeshagen emphasized the dis-
agreement  between  Sulzer  and  Calvin  on  the  issue  of  midwives’  baptism,
turning what Viret described as Sulzer’s «suspension of judgment» on the
issue into «a rather strong inclination towards the Lutheran side.» It is en-
tirely possible that Sulzer’s reservations did not concern the question of bap-
tism per se, but rather Calvin’s conviction that the pastors of Montbéliard
should resist this practice to the point of martyrdom. Moreover, on this point
Bucer  also  apparently  disagreed  with  Calvin. 27  Whatever  the  reasons  for
Sulzer’s reservations, this particular issue should not be allowed to obscure
the many points on which he and Calvin agreed.

Finally, the personal ties which Hundeshagen saw between the so-called
Bernese Lutherans and Luther himself are greatly exaggerated. A brief bi-
ography of each of the leading «Lutherans» shows that in almost every case,
Bucer was the far greater inﬂuence. Only Peter Kunz did not have close links

26 Hundeshagen, Conﬂicte, 160.
27 Hundeshagen, Conﬂicte, 161–2; 180. These issues arose in the context of efforts to impose the
Lutheran ceremonies of Württemberg on the county of Montbéliard and concerned how far
Montbéliard’s pastors could accept these «innovations.» There was no attempt to introduce
these practices in Bern; cf. Calvin’s letter to the Montbéliard pastors, 7 Oct. 1543, CO 11:
623–6, no. 506; Viret’s account of his discussion with Sulzer, Nov. 1543, CO 11: 638–641,
no. 512, and Calvin’s response, CO 11: 6501, no. 520. On Bucer’s disagreement with Calvin
on baptism by midwives, see Viret to Calvin, 16 Feb. 1544, Herminjard 9: 160, no. 1329.
Unfortunately,  if  Sulzer  and  his  colleagues  wrote  to  the  pastors  of  Montbéliard  on  these
questions, their letter has not survived.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

55

Amy Nelson Burnett

with the Strasbourg church, but there is no corresponding evidence to show a
direct inﬂuence of Luther on his sacramental theology. In fact, his case de-
monstrates the persistence of the «Lutheran» myth in the face of evidence to
the contrary.

Although it is a staple of any discussion of Kunz that he studied at Wit-
tenberg, his most recent biographer could ﬁnd no proof that he had ever been
there. He concluded that if Kunz had spent time at Wittenberg, it could only
have been before 1517 – in other words, before the outbreak of the Reforma-
tion, let alone the development of the eucharistic controversy. It is therefore
hard to attribute Kunz’ eucharistic theology to Luther’s personal inﬂuence,
particularly since Kunz became an ardent partisan of Zwingli after meeting
the  Zurich  reformer  in  1526. 28  Hundeshagen  also  reprinted  Kunz’  corre-
spondence with Jodocus Neobolus, Bucer and Capito’s intermediary in Wit-
tenberg,  as  evidence  of  the  Bern  pastor’s  eagerness  to  curry  favor  with
Luther. But Kunz’s letters to Bullinger, written at the same time, show that he
was just as eager to cultivate good relations with Zurich as he was with Wit-
tenberg. 29

Unlike Kunz, Simon Sulzer’s ties with Wittenberg can be substantiated,
for he visited the city in the spring of 1538. There he met with both Luther
and Melanchthon, and he returned home greatly impressed with the Witten-
bergers’ desire for concord. 30 Sulzer’s brief encounter with the Wittenbergers

28 Ernst von Känel, Peter Kunz, Kilchherr von Erlenbach, ein bernischer Reformator, in: 450
Jahre Berner Reformation, ed. Historischer Verein des Kantons Bern, Bern 1980, 156–193.
Curiously, despite his lack of evidence, von Känel concludes that Kunz must have studied at
Wittenberg, because «during his Bern years 1535–1544 he represented a theology that follow-
ed Luther, especially in his doctrine of the Lord’s Supper;» 164. He bases this statement solely
on Hundeshagen.

29 Von Känel also cites Kunz’ correspondence with Neobolus, not weighing the two surviving
letters to Wittenberg against the ﬁve extant letters to Bullinger or Kunz’ correspondence with
the Strasbourgers Bucer, Capito and Jacob Bedrot (three letters) and with Oswald Myconius
and his colleagues in Basel (six letters); see von Känel’s list of correspondence, Peter Kunz,
190–191. Kunz’s two letters from 1538 to Neobolus describing the eucharistic strife in Bern
are reprinted in Hundeshagen, Conﬂicte, 367–373 and 374–375, along with his letter to Bucer,
373–374; cf. Kunz’ letters to Bullinger, 26 May 1538, HBBW 8: 139–141, no. 1132, and 8 July,
1538, HBBW 8: 157–159, no. 1143. Those writing about Kunz routinely cite his description
of Ritter as «Zwingli’s ape» in his letter to Neobolus as evidence of his extreme partisanship.
While striking, the expression was not unique to Kunz, but was used by other individuals as a
slighting reference to the disciples of an opponent; cf. Johannes Oporinus to Heinrich Bul-
linger, 24 Aug. 1542, who included among those opposed to the printing of the Koran pastor
Jakob Truckenbrot, «hoc est [Bonifacii] Amerbachii simia,» ZZB F 46, 694; Johannes Haller
to Bullinger, 20 Nov. 1545, describing his colleague in Augsburg, Wolfgang Musculus, as «ip-
sissimus Bucerus et quasi simia Buceri», ZStA E II 346, 151; and Jean Calvin to Bullinger, 11
May, 1560, referring to «Lutheri simiis», CO 18: 83–5, no. 3197.
Sulzer left Bern in late March and was in Wittenberg for Easter; he also visited Augsburg,
Ulm, and other churches in Hesse, Thuringia and Saxony on his trip; Martin Frecht to Am-

30

56

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

must, however, be balanced by his years of contact with Bucer. Sulzer studied
in Strasbourg as a stipendiate of Bern’s government in 1530–31, then con-
tinued  his  education  at  Basel  during  the  1530s,  at  a  time  when  that  city’s
church was won completely to Bucer’s concord theology. 31 After the death of
Berchtold Haller in 1536, the Bern Senate sent Sulzer to Strasbourg to re-
quest Bucer and Capito’s help in ﬁnding a successor, and he was in the city
when the two Strasbourgers returned home to report on the successful ne-
gotiations that resulted in the Wittenberg Concord. Sulzer’s background and
training inclined him to accept the Strasbourgers’ concord theology, but that
did not make him a Lutheran.

Sebastian Meyer was the Strasbourg pastor whom Sulzer helped recruit to
head the Bernese church after Haller’s death. The Lesemeister of Bern’s Fran-
ciscan convent in the early 1520s, Meyer was one of the earliest supporters of
evangelical teachings in that city. He was expelled in 1524, and after a brief
period in Schaffhausen became a pastor in Strasbourg from 1525–1531. He
was then sent to Augsburg where, along with three other pastors from Stras-
bourg, he sided with the Zwinglians against the Lutheran party in the city. 32
Won to Bucer’s concord theology by the end of 1534, Meyer retired to Stras-
bourg the following year and was loaned to Bern in 1536. Meyer was already
in his sixties, and his appointment in Bern was regarded by everyone as pro-

brosius Blarer, 14 May, 1538; Traugott Schiess, Briefwechsel der Brüder Ambrosius und Tho-
mas Blaurer 1509–1548, Freiburg i.Br. 1908–1912, 1: 876–877, no. 810. In his own correspon-
dence,  Sulzer  emphasized  the  support  Luther  showed  for  concord,  and  not  Luther’s
eucharistic theology; see his letter to Johann Buchser, dean of the Aarau chapter of Bern’s
church, 7 Aug., 1538, Staatsarchiv des Kantons Aargau, AA 2233, no. 20, fol. 84v: «Nam ego
ipse, qui paulo ante Lutherum vidi, qui mensae colloquioque adhibitus sum non semel nec
familiariter solum, sed etiam libere cum ipso et Melanchtone de rebus omnibus contuli, anim-
adverti, si vel tertia parte nos ei propensioni, qua erga nos nostrasque Ecclesias feruntur viri
isti, respondeamus, in manibus nos habere profecto concordiam. Testis est mihi Dominus
Christus, sic universum negocium ex nostris ducibus me accepisse, ut animis et studijs magis
quam re et causa dissensum esse et pugnatum afﬁrmem .. . Vidi revera, nullam hic presentiam
Christi urgeri nisi quae est salutaris, nec unionem aliam quam sacramentalem, hoc est, qua
fateamur rebus sumptis adesse aliud minus a formulis scripturae et patrum abhorreamus.» Cf.
Sulzer  to  Vadian,  31  Jan.  1540,  Emil Arbenz  and  Hermann Wartmann,  eds.,  Vadianische
Briefsammlung, 1508–1540, St. Gallen 1884–1913 [hereafter Vad BS] 5: 606–608, no. 1098.
Hundeshagen was only the ﬁrst historian to blow Sulzer’s brief visit with Luther entirely out
of proportion. In his biography of Sulzer, Gottlieb Linder attributed even more importance
to Sulzer’s Wittenberg visit, and his narrative has shaped all subsequent accounts of Sulzer’s
life; Gottlieb Linder, Simon Sulzer und sein Antheil an der Reformation im Land Baden, so-
wie an den Unionsbestrebungen, Heidelberg 1890, 14–17. Linder cites Sulzer’s letter to Va-
dian but mistranslates Sulzer’s «sesquiannium» as «vor sechs Jahren.»

31 Burnett, Basel and the Wittenberg Concord.
32 The other three Strasbourg pastors were Theobald Nigri, who returned to Strasbourg after a
matter  of  months,  the  later  Bern  pastor  Wolfgang  Musculus,  and  Bonifacius  Lycosthenes
(Wolfhart);  Friedrich Roth,  Augsburger  Reformationsgeschichte,  vol.  2:  1531–1537  bzw.
1540, Munich 1904, 46–50.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

57

Amy Nelson Burnett

visional until Sulzer had the training and experience to assume leadership of
the city’s church. 33

The fourth major player on the «Lutheran» side, Beat Gerung (or Ge-
ring), had no contact with Luther whatsoever. Gerung had served as school-
master and then pastor in a variety of parishes in Switzerland before becom-
ing a pastor in Zurich. In 1538 he was deposed from his position for adultery,
and he moved ﬁrst to Basel, and then to Strasbourg. There, on the recom-
mendation of the city’s pastors, he was given the right to marry the mother of
his adulterous child. In 1541 he was sent to Bern as Meyer’s replacement, and
his sermons provoked some of the most bitter conﬂicts in that city over the
next several years. Gerung’s checkered past would come back to haunt him.
Although Zurich’s pastors were quite sympathetic to Gerung’s plight after
his deposition, they turned against him after he was sent to Bern and used the
adultery as evidence of his unsuitability for pastoral ofﬁce. 34

Of these four pastors, three had spent several years either in Strasbourg or
in Basel, whose church had strong ties with Strasbourg. If one were to draw
any conclusions about their theological leanings on the basis of their person-
al ties, it seems obvious that the most important inﬂuences were the Stras-
bourg theologians Bucer and Capito, not Luther. Neither Meyer nor Gerung
ever  met  Luther  in  person,  and  Sulzer’s  brief  encounter  with  the  Witten-
berger was hardly enough to cause the theological conversion that has been
attributed to it. While all of them could have had direct access to Luther’s
theology through his published works, it seems most likely that their know-
ledge of Luther’s theology was passed through a Buceran ﬁlter. This hypo-
thesis is conﬁrmed by a survey of the eucharistic teachings of the Bern «Lu-
therans.» The letters, sermons and confessions of Kunz, Meyer and Sulzer all
reveal the commitment of these three pastors to Bucer’s concord theology.
The earliest account of Kunz’ understanding of the Eucharist comes not
from Kunz himself but from Eberhard von Rümlang, who described a con-

33 Bern Senate to Bucer and Capito, 26 Feb., 1536, BeStA A III 24 (T Missiven W), 208; Bucer
and Capito to Bern Senate, 6 July 1536, BeStA A V 1421 (U. P. 56), 21. On Meyer’s support
for  Bucer’s  concord  efforts,  Roth,  Augsburger  Reformationsgeschichte,  184–86;  Köhler,
Zwingli und Luther, 372–375.

34 After being dismissed from his Bern post in 1548, Gerung returned to Strasbourg. Despite
Bucer’s warnings, he was named pastor of St. Thomas (Bucer’s former parish) in 1550. He
soon became involved in various conﬂicts with his fellow pastors and was ﬁnally removed
from ofﬁce in 1556; HBBW 3: 122, n. 15; BDS 10: 477–485 (which does not mention either
Gerung’s past or his future positions as pastor); Werner Bellardi, Die Geschichte der «Christ-
lichen Gemeinschaft» in Strassburg (1546/1550), Leipzig 1934 (QFRG 18), 100. Theodor Bi-
bliander commended Gerung to Myconius, 6 Mar. 1538, ZZB Ms S 44: 56: «Beatus enim Ge-
ringus Lucernas, amicus meus intimus, jam est afﬂictus et indigus opis amicorum. Eum si
juves rem feceris rectissimam mihique gratissimam;» cf. Bullinger’s judgment of Gerung to
Vadian, 5 Oct. 1541, Vad BS 6: 74–75, no. 1200.

58

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

versation with Kunz in a letter to Heinrich Bullinger written in early 1540.
Although in general the second-hand descriptions of the teachings of Bern’s
«Lutherans» are colored by polemic and must be used with caution, in this
case von Rümlang sought Bullinger’s judgment and seems to have portrayed
Kunz’ position as accurately as possible.

Rümlang began his letter by informing Bullinger that the preachers, and
especially Kunz, were now teaching about the sacrament in an acceptable
way and had retreated from «the crudeness and acerbity» with which they
had advocated «the substantial eating (which they called the eating of the true
body of Christ).» He then summarized the position Kunz had explained to
him in an attempt to persuade von Rümlang that the two men agreed on the
sacrament. According to von Rümlang, Kunz’s understanding of the words
of institution reﬂected his Christology: Christ’s body was locally contained
in heaven, but it was joined with his divinity in such a way that one could
rightly say that the virgin bore God and, conversely, that the son of man
came down from heaven. The same conjunction of divine and human was
seen in the Lord’s Supper, illustrated by the words of institution: «the body
ought  to  be  said  to  be  under  the  bread  because  the  joining  and  bond  of
Christ’s body and of the splendor of his divinity are inseparable, and so for
this reason God and man, the whole Christ, is perceived and exhibited under
this bread.» But the wording merely signiﬁed the personal union of Christ’s
two natures and was to be understood as a trope. 35 Despite his obvious sus-
picion of Kunz, von Rümlang could not point to any speciﬁcally Lutheran
teaching, but rather presented a position that mixed terminology drawn from
both sides of the eucharistic debate.

Kunz himself described his understanding of the sacrament at length in a
letter  to  Bullinger  written  in  October  1542,  a  few  months  after  a  dispute
among Bern’s pastors on the Lord’s Supper had been settled through the Sen-
ate’s intervention. He began by reminding Bullinger that the Zurich reformer
had found no fault with Kunz’s teaching on the sacrament which the latter
had presented at a meeting of Swiss theologians in Zurich in the spring of
1538. Moreover, Kunz continued, he had read what Bullinger had written on
the  sacrament  in  the  commentary  given  him  by  the  Zurich  reformer  and
could ﬁnd nothing on which the two disagreed. 36 Kunz stated that he held to
the confession of the Swiss churches adopted at Basel – the First Helvetic
Confession – as well as the axioms of the Bern disputation, and then sum-

35 Von Rümlang to Bullinger, 15 Jan. 1540, HBBW 10: 37–39, no. 1351. Von Rümling was both
puzzled by and suspicious of Kunz’ explanation and asked for Bullinger’s opinion; Bullin-
ger’s response has not survived.

36 The commentary was Bullinger’s In sacrosanctum Iesu Christi Domini nostri Evangelium se-

cundum Matthaeum, Commentarium libri XII, Zurich 1542, HBBibl 144.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

59

Amy Nelson Burnett

marized his beliefs: the spiritual gifts given in the sacrament were united sac-
ramentally with the symbols; there was no local inclusion of Christ’s body,
but the spiritual gifts were received by the faithful through faith. Christ was
corporally present in heaven, at God’s right hand, because of the true nature
of his human body. Nonetheless, Christ was also present spiritually and ce-
lestially in the Supper, offering and presenting (exhibet) himself to us, who
are fed to eternal life. As the mouth received bread and wine, so the mind and
spirit ate Christ’s body and drank his blood. 37

Although  Hundeshagen  described  Kunz  as  «dependent  upon  Luther,»
Kunz’ own position as illustrated by these two confessions cannot be called
Lutheran. 38 In fact, with his insistence that Christ was received by the faith-
ful through faith and that his body was located in one place in heaven, Kunz
was much closer to Bullinger than he was to Luther. If anything, von Rüm-
lang’s presentation of Kunz’ Christology suggests that Kunz was eclectic in
his theology and not concerned with conforming strictly to the positions of
either  side.  This  stance  would  have  made  him  more  open  to  a  mediating
theology such as that proposed by Bucer. That inﬂuence is revealed by Kunz’
references  to  sacramental  union  and  the  exhibition  of  Christ’s  body  and
blood, terms that Bullinger both recognized and criticized in his response to
Kunz’s confession. 39

While Kunz may have leaned towards Bullinger in his interpretation of
Bucer’s  concord  theology,  his  colleague  Sebastian  Meyer  was  closer  to
Luther. But Meyer too stayed within the parameters set out by the First Hel-
vetic Confession and the Wittenberg Concord. In a letter to Konrad Pellikan
written  at  the  end  of  1537,  Meyer  described  both  his  general  strategy  for
preaching on the Lord’s Supper and the most important theological prin-

37 Kunz to Bullinger, 20 Oct. 1542, ZStA E II 358, 136ff.: «Conﬁteor item tecum Christum cor-
poraliter in coelis esse ad dexteram patris adeoque in uno aliquo coeli loco propter veri cor-
poris modum iterumque Christum hunc eundem verum deum et hominem nihilominus ec-
clesiae suae praesentem esse, pascere, satiare et viviﬁcare ﬁdeles suos coenam sacram in terris
celebrantes, non praesentia corporali, sed spirituali et plane coelesti, qua sola se suis fruen-
dum praebet spiritualiter, efﬁcaciter plene et eo prorsus modo, quo ﬁdelibus suis salutaris et
ad vitam satis efﬁcax esse potest, vivatque ipse in suis et sui in ipso, nihil horum mysteriorum
intelligente caeca carnis ratione. Offert ergo se nobis exhibetque cum omnibus bonis suis,
quandoquidem non sola ﬁdes, sed ipsemet Christus sit vitalis refectio nostra ad vitam aeter-
nam.»

38 Hundeshagen, Conﬂicte, 70. Hundeshagen did not know of Kunz’ letter to Bullinger, but he
had read Bullinger’s response to Kunz (see following note) and was aware that in his confes-
sion Kunz had rejected the ubiquity of Christ’s body and emphasized the spiritual eating of
Christ’s ﬂesh and blood. Although he described it as «a repetition of the Calvinistic confes-
sion of 1537», (i. e. Calvin’s confession of faith presented at the Bern synod in Sept. 1537), he
persisted in labeling Kunz a Lutheran and accused him of duplicity, 165–168.

39 He also complained about the distribution among Bucer’s supporters of the latter’s letter to

Comander; Bullinger to Kunz, 30 Oct. 1542, ZStA E II 342, 108ff.

60

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

ciples that underlay his sermons. He was committed to the phrasing of the
First  Helvetic  Confession  and  the  letter  of  the  Swiss  churches  to  Luther,
which stated that Christ’s body and blood were truly consumed, but in a
spiritual  and  mysterious  way  by  the  believing  mind.  This  wording  corre-
sponded to Scripture and the Fathers, and it refuted both the crude and crass
teachings  of  the  papists  and  the  empty  signs  asserted  by  the  Anabaptists.
There was no need to discuss anything more detailed than Christ’s simple
presence in the sacrament before a simple and uneducated audience. More-
over, with such an audience it was always best to stick to the words of Christ
himself, even if they were obscure, than to go off on lengthy explanations and
arguments about the meaning of those words. 40

Meyer did not openly criticize the Zurich church in his letter to Pellikan,
but over the next few years he expressed his frustration with the hostility the
Zurichers harbored towards Luther, Bucer and the latter’s efforts for con-
cord. His most explicit criticism of the Zurich position came in a letter to Va-
dian from early 1540. With their continual harping on terms such as «signify,
represent, place before our eyes, remind, testify,» the purpose of the Zwing-
lians  seemed  to  be  to  persuade  everyone  that  Christ  was  absent  from  his
church and from the sacrament, which was reduced to a ceremony of com-
memoration  and  thanksgiving.  But  no  one  ever  read  in  their  writings  the
most important point of the sacrament, that «together with the symbols pro-
vided and received rightly according to Christ’s institution, the true body
and blood of Christ are offered, delivered and procured, received and eaten
(porrigi, tradi et exhiberi, percipi et manducari) according to the most certain
promise of the Lord himself, and, in sum, Christ is very nearly as present as
can be and entirely within his own.» 41

The sermon Meyer preached on Palm Sunday of 1540 illustrates how he
presented his understanding of the sacrament to his congregation. He told

40 Meyer  to  Pellikan,  27  Dec.  1537,  ZZB  Ms  S 43:  189:  «Hoc  autem  in  praesenti  dico,  mihi
summopere placere, si modis loquendi utamur, quibus in Confessione Basiliensi, et in literis
ad Lutherum, nam hi consonant modis loquendi scripturae et Patrum, cavent errores Papi-
starum, et ipsam S. Coenam contra Anabaptistas ecclesiae ﬁdeli reddunt augustiorem, ubi
plenis verbis fatemur, corpus Domini vere edi, sanguinemque ipsius vere bibi, sed spirituali
modo in mysterio et a ﬁdeli menti, quo aeternum inde vivat. Mihi enim magis videtur, dan-
dam esse operam, ut simpliciter praesentiam Domini in Coena, coram simplici et rudi plebe-
cula constanter more Scripturae et Patrum asseveremus, quam ut scrupulosius et curiosius de
modo  eius  praesentiae  argutemur,  modo  caveamus,  ne  Ecclesia  crudam  illam  et  crassam,
quam Papistae docent, corporis Christi intelligat praesentiam, id quod satis caveri videtur, per
dictos in Confessione modos, ac paullo supra positos .. . Quod si quis dixerit mihi: At obscura
sunt quae mystice proferuntur? Respondeo: Hoc probe novit Christus, probe noverunt Apo-
stoli, probe noverunt Patres, apud quos tamen nullas huiusmodi leges argutas ac frigidas ex-
positiones, quibus res magis extenuetur.»

41 Meyer to Vadian, 29 Jan. 1540, Vad BS 5: 594–604, no. 1095; for Meyer’s earlier criticism of

Zurich, see his letter to Vadian, 27 Jan. 1539, Vad BS 5: 527–529, no. 1036.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

61

Amy Nelson Burnett

his hearers that it was necessary to believe that «we received not only bread
and wine but with them also the true body and blood of Christ as food for
eternal life.» 42 This gift of Christ’s body and blood was not received in any
natural or rational manner, but rather through faith. After a brief paraphrase
of John 6, Meyer asserted that the manner and form of Christ’s presence was
a mystery, though he speciﬁcally rejected the local enclosure of Christ’s body
in the bread. Nevertheless, the Lord truly gave his body and blood to his dis-
ciples to be eaten, and thus those receiving the sacrament could know with-
out any doubt that they received Christ’s true body and blood as food for
their souls. More provocatively, he asserted that those who believed they re-
ceived mere signs did not believe Christ was truly present and thus sinned
against Christ’s body and blood, no less than the Corinthians had. 43

Meyer’s incendiary statement helps explain why the conﬂict in Bern over
the Lord’s Supper was so bitter. Moreover, his attacks on the Zwinglian in-
terpretation  of  the  sacrament  were  bound  to  link  him  with  Luther  in  the
mind  of  his  opponents.  Nevertheless,  Meyer’s  more  positive  statements
about the sacrament remain faithful to Bucer’s concord theology. Like Bucer,
he taught that the true body and blood of Christ were offered with the sym-
bols according to Christ’s institution, he freely used the terms «offered, de-

42

Sermon  preserved  in  Basel  Universitätsbibliothek  [hereafter  BUB],  MsKiAr  22a,  fol.
276r-279r, no. 38a. Citation at fol. 277r: «Eben selliche gstalt hat es auch mit dem H. Sacra-
menten des H. Nachtmols, in wellichem so mir zvor wol wyn vnd brot die sychbarlichen ele-
ment griffen vnd gsächen, vnd empﬁnden, So glauben mir doch hiemit vestiglich, dz wyr nit
allein brot vnd wyn, sunder auch mit dänen, den woren Lib und dz wor blut Christi Jesu
empfahendt, zu einer spyß des ewigen läbens, diwil dan Christus ustruckenlich die verheyß,
vnd die H. geschrifft dz bezygt.»

43 BUB MsKiAr 22a, fol. 278r-279r: «Die wys und form oder Maß, wie dise gschächt in dr
gheymnuß, eroffnet der Herr synen lieben Jüngeren in sym H. abendtmol, dz namlich in der
gheymnuß syn lib worhaftig geeßen, vnd syn blut getruncken, vnd dz uß der wirckung gött-
licher krafft, wen dz mit dancksagung gnoßen wyrt .. .  | Man soll auch hie kein rümbliche ge-
genwirtikeit des Herren libs inbilden, diewil und er nit nathürlich und liblicher wyß (wiewol
doch worlich) empfangen wyrt. Und so das ﬂeysch Christi, also empfangen wyrt, so gibt es
ein nüwigs läben, dan es ist ein ﬂeisch des wortzs, vnnd ein ﬂeisch des läbens, welliches so mir
eßen wärden, so werden mir in im auch zu lust verwandelet vnd ein ﬂeisch mit synem ﬂeysch,
welliches auch inwonet syn H. geyst, wölliches unser tödlichen cörper erwöcken wyrt .. .
Und domit wirß enden, so hat die sach sych in einer Sum allso, dz, wöllicher glaubt, dz er mit
dem zeychen brot vnd wyns den woren Lib vnd dz wor blut Christi Jesu empfahe, zu einer
spyß der seelen, domit er die fröliche vfferstendtnuß vnd dz eüwig läben empfache, der emp-
fache dz auch on allen zweiffel, Wellicher aber glaubt er empfache do nüt dan ein zeychen
dären dingen, der halltet Christum den herren nit fyr recht, vnd worlich worhafft, vnd ver-
syndiget sych an dem lib vnd blut des Herren, nitt minder dan die Corinther mit yrer fülerey
vnd verachtung der armen, in dem abendtmol, als die den lib des herren | nit vnderscheyden,
Von wägen dz dy weder mit glauben noch mit geyst eßendt.» Hundeshagen brieﬂy describes
the conﬂict in Bern that was caused by this sermon, but he did not know the contents of the
sermon, Conﬂicte, 107–108.

62

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

livered and procured,» and he speciﬁed that one received Christ’s body and
blood through faith.

Sick and tired of the perpetual conﬂict over the Lord’s Supper – for which
he was in part responsible – Meyer retired to Strasbourg in 1541. 44 The pastor
elected to succeed him, Simon Sulzer, would achieve notoriety ﬁrst as the
head of Bern’s «Lutheran» faction until his expulsion from that city in 1548,
and then as the man who led Basel’s church in a «Lutheran» direction until
his death in 1585. As the theology professor at Bern’s academy, Sulzer pres-
ented his confession concerning the Lord’s Supper to a colloquy of pastors in
January of 1540.

In clear reliance on Bucer and the First Helvetic Confession, he deﬁned
the sacrament as «a holy action, instituted by Christ himself, in which the
Lord Jesus, through the ministry of the church, with the visible and percep-
tible signs, bread and wine, gives and presents the true communion of his
body and blood to his own.» 45 The remainder of the confession, an expla-
nation of this deﬁnition, contains every element of Bucer’s concord theology,
using  language  already  familiar  from  Meyer’s  descriptions  of  the  Lord’s
Supper. To compensate for human weakness, God works through his min-
isters who administer the visible signs of the sacraments. These visible signs
not only represent God’s invisible gifts but also transmit them. The sign and
thing signiﬁed are joined in sacramental union so that the eyes see and mouth
eats the physical and external sign, while the eyes of faith and the mouth of
the soul receive the heavenly gifts. 46 Sulzer rejected transubstantiation and

44 Peter Kunz to Joachim Vadian, Vad BS 6: 88–90, no. 1211. By the end of 1537, even the sup-
porters of Bucer’s concord efforts in Basel recognized that Meyer was contributing to the tur-
moil in Bern. Basel’s Bürgermeister Jakob Meyer referred to him as «alt und kybig.» In letters
to Bullinger from 26 Nov. 1537 both Jacob Meyer and Simon Grynaeus suggested that Meyer
be removed from Bern; HBBW 7: 304–306, no. 1070, and 309–310, no. 1072.

45 BUB MsKiAr 22a, no. 38b, fol. 280r: «Das Nachtmol des herren ist ein heylige handtlung,
von  dem  herren  Christo  selbs  vffgesetzt,  in  dären  der  herr  Jesus  durch  den  dienst  der
kilchen,  mit  sychtbarlichen  vnd  empﬁndtlichen  zeychen,  brots  vnd  wyns,  die  wore
gmeinschafft synes libs vnd blutzs, das ist sych selbst dargibt vnd schenckt den synen, mit
allen  himelschlichen  schätzen,  zu  der  hoffnung  der  fröhlichen  vfferstandtnuß,  vnd  des
eüwigen läbens.»

46 BUB MsKiAr 22a, fol. 281v: «Semlicher hoher schatz wyrt durch sychtbarliche ding vnd zey-
chen brot vnd wyn allso dargreycht, dz ein anders den liblichen augen zeygt wyrt, vnd von
dem mundt des libs empfangen wyrt, Ein anders aber durch dz wort gegäben vnd gschenckt
wyrt, ein sömlichs namlich das wie es den liblichen augen vnsychtbarlich ist: Allso ist es den
augen des glaubens bekant, vnd dz mit dem mundt der seelen empfangen wyrt. Dan wie Au-
gustinus spricht, als der lib, allso hat auch die seel yre augen vnd yr mundt, die mit dem, dz
der lib vom vßerlichen diener empfocht libliche vnd vßerliche ding, allso auch die seel mit
yrem mundt von dem ynnerlichen diener dem herren Christo namlich selber, vff den schau-
wen syn lib vnd blut, beide recht vnd worlich. Dan sy weyst die gotts verstendig seel, das die
ding dargreicht vnd übergäben syndt, erstlich ein empﬁndtlichs vnd übergroß zeychen dem
mundt des libs, Ein anders aber yren der seelen, namlich ein vnempﬁndtlichs vnd himlisch,

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

63

Amy Nelson Burnett

the local inclusion of Christ’s body in the bread. Without directly rejecting
Bullinger’s  Christology,  he  also  argued  that  the  sacramental  union  and
Christ’s true presence in the Lord’s Supper did not contradict his true human
nature.  One  must  simply  accept  that  the  paradox  of  Christ’s  presence  in
heaven and his true presence in the sacrament was beyond human under-
standing and reason. 47

This brief presentation of the eucharistic theology taught at Bern by the
so-called Lutherans should be enough to demonstrate their theological de-
pendence on Bucer. Their mis-labeling as Lutherans raises larger questions
about  the  terminology  used  to  describe  the  participants  in  the  eucharistic
controversy. Like Bern’s Zwinglians, Carl Hundeshagen recognized the in-
ﬂuence of Bucer and Capito on Bern’s church, but he equated the eucharistic
theology of the Strasbourgers with that of Luther. According to this view,
there were only two positions on the Lord’s Supper: that of Zwingli, and that
of  Luther.  Any  movement  away  from  Zwingli’s  eucharistic  teaching  was
therefore Lutheranizing, and those who advocated that movement were Lu-
therans. The fact that Luther accepted the positions set forth in the Witten-
berg Concord only conﬁrmed this equation in the mind of Bern’s Zwing-
lians,  and  because  the  churches  of  south  Germany  who  endorsed  the
Concord  eventually  did  become  Lutheran,  later  historians  have  been
tempted to accept this equation as well.

Such an equation is misleading and anachronistic, however. The problems
inherent in it are made plain merely by pointing out that Jean Calvin ac-
cepted the Wittenberg Concord while he was a pastor in Strasbourg. 48 To call
Calvin a Lutheran makes that term so broad that it becomes virtually mean-
ingless. Moreover, the Buceran concord theology taught in Bern differed sig-

sampt der sacramentlichen niessung, mit dem mundt des glaubens zuempfachen vnd zunie-
ßen.»

47 BUB MsKiAr 22a, fol. 282r-v: «Und durch solliche Sacramentliche vereynigung hallte ich
den herren rächt vnd worlich gegenwertig im abendtmol, nit dz er von der selbigen wägen ei-
nige creathurliche eigenschafft an sych nemme, der hoch vnd herliche ist, vnd sytz zu der
grächten synes vatters, vndt so vil man die nathürliche art betracht eines libs, ist er allein im
himel, vnd ist doch semlichs nit abbrüchlich syner woren gegenwertikeit, | die vns widerfar
on allen zwifel, vß krafft synes h. worts, in dem er vns versprochen, Er spricht, ich worer gott
vnd mensch, wölle by vns bliben byß zum endt der wellt, Mathej. 28 [20]. Einer semlichen
wys aber kein synn noch menschlich gmüet vnd verstandt faßen mag, namlich wie er wol kan,
wol weyß, vnd vermag.»

48 Brian A. Gerrish, Strasbourg Revisited: Reformed Perspectives on the Augsburg Confession,
in: The Old Protestantism, 248–263; Bizer, Studien, 244–246. Grass emphasizes Calvin’s cri-
ticism of the Wittenberg Concord, expressed in his letter to Bucer written in early 1538, and
questions  whether  Calvin  actually  signed  the  Concord  in  Strasbourg,  Abendmahlslehre,
198–204; but Calvin’s letter to Bucer must be understood in the context of the Bern synod of
Sept. 1537, as Augustijn has demonstrated, «Bern and France.» Calvin’s attitude towards Bu-
cer, and to Bucer’s concord efforts, changed signiﬁcantly after his move to Strasbourg.

64

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

niﬁcantly both from Luther’s own eucharistic theology and from the way the
term  «Lutheran»  was  gradually  deﬁned  through  the  bitter  confessional
struggles of the second half of the century. Bucer’s concord theology rejected
oral  manducation,  teaching  instead  a  distinction  between  the  elements  of
bread and wine received by mouth, and Christ’s body and blood received by
the soul. It also rejected the manducatio impiorum, holding to the principle
that some amount of faith, however weak and defective, must exist for one to
receive Christ’s body and blood. Finally, Bucer and his followers differed
from both the Reformed and from later Lutherans in their Christology. Al-
though  they  criticized  the  Reformed  insistence  on  the  local  presence  of
Christ’s body in heaven, they also refused to speculate about how Christ’s
body could be present both in heaven and in the sacrament. Instead they re-
mained reticent in their Christology, emphasizing the priority of Scripture
over Aristotle and the limits of human understanding. 49

It might be more accurate to describe Bucer’s concord theology as Lu-
theranizing, if this were taken to mean moving away from the Zurich posi-
tion  and  towards  that  of  Wittenberg.  The  hard-core  Zwinglians  who  op-
posed the Buceran party in Bern certainly understood any deviation from
Zwingli as selling out to Luther. But there are signiﬁcant problems with this
term  as  well.  The  more  theologically  sensitive  accounts  of  the  eucharistic
controversy in Bern based on primary sources do indeed use the term «Lu-
theranizing,» but even in these accounts the careful distinction too often dis-
appears, and «Lutheranizing» becomes simply «Lutheran.» And most of the
secondary accounts overlook this distinction entirely and speak simply of
the Lutherans in Bern. The term thus presents too many possibilities for mis-
understanding to be useful.

There is also a more serious objection to the term, for to call the Bernese
faction Lutheranizing ignores Bucer’s key role in developing that theology
and distorts both the purpose and the accomplishments of Bucer’s concord
efforts. The Strasbourg reformer was not trying to introduce Lutheranism,
but was rather trying to formulate a concord theology acceptable to both Lu-
therans and the Swiss, a middle ground between the two sides. Oswald My-
conius, perhaps Bucer’s staunchest supporter in Switzerland, put this clearly
in a letter to Theodor Bibliander written in the fall of 1538. There he repeated
Bucer’s  argument  that  Zwingli  and  Oecolampadius  had  misunderstood
Luther as speaking too crassly about the presence of Christ’s body and blood

49 Capito stated this position clearly in a letter to Vadian, 26 Aug. 1538, Vad BS 5: 504–507, no.
1021: «Neque sane ego velim onerare meam conscientiam cum stulta illa philosophia de ab-
sentia Christi in uno loco circumscriptivo, qui scio, hominem exaltatum a resurrectione prop-
ter coniunctionem verbi in unam individuam personam, servato etiam corporis malo, alium
habere statum, quam vel Aristotelis ingenium assequatur.»

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

65

Amy Nelson Burnett

in the sacrament, while Luther had never understood that the Swiss reform-
ers did not teach that the sacrament consisted only of empty signs. «Nor can
it be said,» Myconius continued, «that I have departed from the one in order
to approach the other, but rather that I have departed from both that I may
draw closer to both, and this in the way that you should be able to under-
stand from what I have said. Doing this, I am acting in a way that above all is
ﬁtting for members of the body of Christ, with whom we should in truth
agree, not disagree.» 50 Sulzer is reported to have made much the same argu-
ment during one of the many occasions when Bern’s pastors were summoned
before the Senate to settle their quarrels. When one of the city’s Zwinglian
pastors, Johannes Wäber, «asked if the foreign churches had approached us,
or if we had approached them, he answered that both parties should [move
away]  from  themselves  and  approach  God,  for  there  are  faults  on  both
sides.» 51

For Myconius, as for Bucer’s supporters in Bern, the concord theology
endorsed  in  the  First  Helvetic  Confession  and  the  Wittenberg  Concord
avoided the mistakes and misunderstandings of each side. Any ambiguity in
their own position was in fact a strength, for it enabled concord. To call those
who endorsed this position Lutheranizers overlooks their sincere commit-
ment to a middle ground between Luther and Zwingli.

Last but certainly not least, to categorize the eucharistic conﬂict in Bern as
a  struggle  between  Lutherans  and  Zwinglians  obscures  the  real  issue  that
underlay the debate: where to draw the boundaries around a theology that up
to that point had been called Zwinglian and would in future be called Re-
formed. This question became even more urgent over the 1540s, as Calvin
grew in inﬂuence not only inside Switzerland, but outside it as well.

On the central issue addressed by the Wittenberg Concord, Christ’s real
presence in the sacrament, Calvin’s theology was closer to Luther than it was

50

51

66

7 Sept. 1538, ZZB Ms S 45: 70: «Video Zwinglium et Oecolampadium (quos aliquamdiu se-
cutus sum tamen) ab initio non intellexisse, quod Lutherus crassum, et qui ﬁt ratione seculi
huius, esum carnis Christi noluerit, imo quod oderit talem, ut veritati Domini haud consen-
taneum.  Video  item  Lutherum  nunquam  intellexisse,  dum  contentione  etiamnum  saeviit,
duos illos non nuda signa voluisse habere in Coena, sed Christum praesentem, et cibum ani-
mae carnem eius, et sanguinem potum .. . Neque ideo discessisse ab altero vere dicor, ad alte-
rum accessisse, sed potius discessisse ab utroque et accessisse ad utrumque, ratione, quam tu
ex dictis facile potes intelligere. Ita faciens enim ago quod in primis decet membra corporis
Christi, quorum est in veritate concordare, non discordare .. .» Bucer frequently repeated this
view that Luther and the Swiss had simply misunderstood each other because of their diffe-
rent priorities; there is a particularly lengthy statement of this position in his Defensio adver-
sus Axioma Catholicum, BOL 5: 89–102.
Stettler’s Berner Chronik, describing an appearance before the Senate on 5 Dec. 1544; BeStA,
DQ 11, vol. D (1541–50), 92v-93r: «Allß ouch bemellter Wäber, Inne gefragt ob die vßlenn-
dischen Kilchen zue vnnß, oder wir zue innen tretten, geantwortet, daß beide Partheyen,
vonn Innen selb zue Godt tretten söllennt, dann ouch vff beiden syten etwaß mangels.»

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

to Zwingli. 52 But in arguing that Christ’s presence is spiritual and that the
beneﬁts of the sacrament are received only by the faithful, Calvin was closer
to Bucer than he was to Luther. Calvin’s use of the terms exhibere and sub-
stantia, his frequent reference to the communion of Christ’s body and blood,
and his insistence that the elements were instruments of divine grace demon-
strated the similarities of his eucharistic theology to that of Bucer. 53 To be
sure, Calvin shared with the Zurich theologians an understanding of the na-
ture of Christ’s truly human body that required it to be locally circumscribed
in heaven, and this distinguished his doctrine of the sacrament from Bucer’s,
but this difference was not directly relevant to the Wittenberg Concord. It
was inevitable, then, that Calvin would fall under the same suspicion of Lu-
theranism – or more precisely, of Buceranism – as Kunz, Meyer and Sulzer.
The  similarities  between  Calvin’s  and  Bucer’s  eucharistic  theology  had
serious ramiﬁcations, for they distanced the churches of western Switzerland
theologically from that of Zurich. If Bucer’s theology triumphed in Bern, the
way  would  conceivably  be  open  for  both  that  church  and  the  church  of
Geneva to endorse a eucharistic concord with the German churches that in-
cluded all who taught Christ’s presence in the sacrament and excluded only
those  who  still  clung  to  Zwingli’s  representational  view. 54  The  eucharistic
controversy in Bern thus became a struggle for the fate of Zwingli’s theology.
In the end, Bern remained loyal to its own Zwinglian tradition. After a
decade  marked  by  disputes  among  the  clergy,  the  leaders  of  the  Buceran
party were dismissed from their posts and expelled from the city in April of
1548. Their expulsion led to a backlash against anyone associated with Bucer,
including not only Calvin but Bern’s new theology professor Wolfgang Mus-
culus as well. 55 It is no coincidence that only a few weeks after the expulsion

53

52 Calvin did not use «real» with regard to Christ’s body, but he granted its use as an equivalent
to «true» when discussing Christ’s presence, Joseph Tylenda, Calvin and Christ’s Presence in
the Supper – True or Real, in: Scottish Journal of Theology 27, 1974, 65–75. On the similari-
ties between Calvin and Luther, Brian A. Gerrish, Gospel and Eucharist: John Calvin on the
Lord’s Supper, in: The Old Protestantism, 108–117; on the differences between Calvin and
Zwingli, see Gerrish, The Lord’s Supper.
See for example the confession Calvin submitted to the Bern synod of Sept. 1537 and which
was signed by Bucer and Capito, CO 5: 711–712: «Ergo spiritum eius vinculum esse nostrae
cum ipso participationis agnoscimus, sed ita ut nos ille carnis et sanguinis Domini substantia
vere ad immortalitatem pascat, et eorum participatione viviﬁcet. Hanc autem carnis et sangui-
nis sui communionem Christus sub panis et vini symbolis in sacrosancta sua coena offert, et
exhibet omnibus qui eam rite celebrant iuxta legitimum eius institutum.»

54 The broad range of views included in such a consensus would have made it inherently unsta-
ble, but that is not the issue. More signiﬁcant is the fact that it would have changed the later
inter-confessional debates on the Eucharist into inner-confessional ones.

55 Cf. Johannes Haller to Calvin, CO 13: 14–15, no. 1052; Haller to Bullinger, 26 July 1548,
CO 13: 19–20, no. 1055; and again on 30 Aug. 1548, ZStA E II 370, 79, referring to ﬁnding
positions for refugee pastors from Germany: «De illis autem, qui vel semel Lutheranismi aut

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

67

Amy Nelson Burnett

of Bern’s Bucerans,  Calvin traveled  to  Zurich and opened the discussions
with  Bullinger  that  would  eventually  lead  to  the  Consensus  Tigurinus.
Threatened by Savoy, faced with the hostility of the now dominant Zwing-
lians in Bern, and separated geographically from Basel and the cities of south
Germany that endorsed Bucer’s concord theology, Calvin had little choice
but to try and improve his relations with Zurich. 56

It took another year of negotiation for the two parties to reach a point
where  they  could  agree  on  a  common  statement  concerning  the  Lord’s
Supper. Scholars have long recognized that both Calvin and Bullinger made
concessions to the other in order to reach their agreement. It is less often no-
ticed that the Consensus Tigurinus carefully excluded those features most
characteristic of Bucer’s concord theology. The concessions that Calvin made
to Bullinger in the Consensus concerned precisely those points which Bul-
linger found most objectionable in Bucer’s theology, such as the terms exhi-
bere and substantia, and the instrumental nature of the signs (or even the
term instrumentum). The Consensus also contained an explicit endorsement
of the local circumscription of Christ’s body in heaven, a point on which
Calvin  had  always  agreed  with  Zurich  against  Bucer. 57  In  return  for  this
agreement with Calvin, Bullinger ﬁnally abandoned Zwingli’s symbolic and
representational view of the Lord’s Supper. 58 If the Consensus was a victory

Buceranismi (nam cogimur, proh dolor, tam seditiosis uti vocabulis) nota commaculati fue-
runt, nihil promittere possum omnino; ita in illos omnium tam symmistarum, quam princi-
pum animi incanduerunt, ut etiam suspectus facile ﬁere possit, quisquis pro ipsorum com-
mendatione vel verbum dixerit.» Musculus had been a pastor in Strasbourg with Bucer and
was one of the original signatories of the Wittenberg Concord. On Haller’s impression of
Musculus when he ﬁrst met him in Augsburg, see n. 29 above.

56 The Bucerans in Bern were closely connected with the reasons for Calvin’s trip. The ofﬁcial
reason for their deposition was their defense of Pierre Viret’s theses on the power of the keys
and the authority of the ministry. Calvin made his trip to Zurich in order to win Zurich’s sup-
port for Viret. An earlier round of negotiations on the sacrament, which Calvin initiated in
Feb., 1547, had reached a stalemate. On the background and contents of the Consensus Ti-
gurinus, W. Kolfhaus, Der Verkehr Calvins mit Bullinger, in: Calvinstudien, ed. A. Bohatec,
Leipzig 1909, 27–125, esp. pp. 44–74; Bizer, Studien, 248–263; Otto Erich Strasser, Der Con-
sensus Tigurinus, in: Zwa 9, 1949, 1–16; Ulrich Gäbler, Das Zustandekommen des Consensus
Tigurinus vom Jahre 1549, in: Theologische Literaturzeitung 104, 1979, 321–332; Paul Ro-
rem, Calvin and Bullinger on the Lord’s Supper, Nottingham 1989, 20–58.

57 Rorem notices the anti-Buceran thrust of the Consensus, but he does not connect it explicitly
with events in Bern, Calvin and Bullinger, 41–45; Gäbler also points out that one result of the
Consensus was to clear Calvin of suspicions that he was a Buceran, Zustandekommen. So
deep was the hostility to Bucer in Bern that the Consensus was suspect to some, despite its
studious  avoidance  of  positions  identiﬁed  with  Bucer;  Haller  to  Bullinger,  27  June  1549,
CO 13: 315–316, no. 1215.

58 Kolfhaus, Verkehr, 69–70. It has been argued that the Swiss moved away from the purely
symbolic view of the sacrament already in the First Helvetic Confession; Strasser, Consensus;
more generally on Bullinger’s earlier willingness to make concessions for the sake of concord,
Martin Friedrich, Heinrich Bullinger und die Wittenberger Konkordie. Ein Ökumeniker im

68

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

The Myth of the Swiss Lutherans: Martin Bucer and the Eucharistic Controversy in Bern

for Calvin in winning the support of the Zurich church, it was also a victory
for Bullinger in excluding key features of Bucer’s eucharistic theology from
what would become a foundational document for the Reformed church.

For in this respect, the Consensus Tigurinus cannot be overestimated. The
Consensus did not end all differences between the Calvinist and the Zwing-
lian branches of the Reformed faith, nor did it improve relations between the
churches of Geneva and Bern as Calvin had hoped. But it did lay out a com-
mon position on the Lord’s Supper that would be cited in the future as nor-
mative by both sides. 59 It also placed Calvin clearly on the side of Zwingli’s
heirs in Zurich and changed the terms of the eucharistic debate. No longer
did Lutherans and Zwinglians argue about the presence of Christ in the sac-
rament. During the eucharistic controversies of the later sixteenth century,
Christ’s  presence  was  accepted  by  both  sides,  and  the  disagreement  now
hinged  on  whether  that  presence  was  corporal  or  only  spiritual.  And  the
Consensus Tigurinus played a key role, for its publication in 1551 sparked
the polemical exchanges between Joachim Westphal and Calvin that initiated
this second phase of the eucharistic controversy. In an ironic twist of fate, the
Consensus Tigurinus was therefore both the ﬁnal outcome of Bucer’s con-
cord efforts in Bern and the starting point of the renewed polemical battles
that ﬁrmly ﬁxed the confessional boundaries between Lutheran and Reform-
ed in the later sixteenth century.

Abstract:

Most  accounts  of  the  eucharistic  controversy  assume  that  after  the  Swiss
cities rejected the Wittenberg Concord, Martin Bucer had no more inﬂuence
in Switzerland. In Bern, however, a party supporting Bucer’s concord theol-

Streit um das Abendmahl, in: Zwa 24, 1997, 59–79. This argument holds true for the Swiss
who later followed Bucer, but the Zurich church did not genuinely embrace the First Helvetic
Confession. By the 1540s Bucer was complaining that Zurich had receded from the ﬁrst Hel-
vetic Confession, and the Wahrhaffte Bekenntnis of 1545, written in response to Luther’s
Kurtze Bekenntnis of the preceding year, certainly did not go as far as the earlier confession;
Bucer to Vadian, 21 Feb. 1545, Vad BS 6: 396–397, no. 1384; Bucer to Blarer, 25 Feb. 1545,
Schiess 2: 348–349, no. 1168.

59 This was particularly the case in the wake of Beza’s and Farel’s confession on the Lord’s Sup-
per submitted to the Duke of Württemberg in 1557; Salvatore Corda, Bullinger e la confes-
sione eucaristica di Göppingen (1557), in: Heinrich Bullinger 1504–1575. Gesammelte Auf-
sätze zum 400. Todestag, ed. Ulrich Gäbler and Erland Herkenrath, Zürich 1975, 1: 109–122.
Bullinger also followed the formulations of the Consensus Tigurinus in his Decades, Paul
Sanders, Heinrich Bullinger et le «zwinglianisme tardif» aux lendemains du «Consensus Ti-
gurinus», in: Reformiertes Erbe. Festschrift für Gottfried W. Locher zu seinem 80. Geburts-
tag, ed. Heiko A. Oberman, Ernst Saxer, Alfred Schindler and Heinzpeter Stucki, Zurich
1992 (Zwa 19), 1: 307–323.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

69

Amy Nelson Burnett

ogy dominated the church from the later 1530s through the 1540s. Although
traditionally identiﬁed as Lutherans, the theological statements of this group
demonstrate  their  loyalty  to  Bucer’s  «middle  way»  between  Luther  and
Zwingli. The expulsion of this party from Bern in 1548 meant the end of
Bucer’s inﬂuence in western Switzerland, ﬁnalized by the Consensus Tiguri-
nus, which carefully avoided any Buceran terminology.

Prof. Dr. Amy Nelson Burnett, Lincoln NE

70

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

