Torrance Kirby

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

by Torrance Kirby

Throughout the year 2004 a Quincentenary Jubilee was held in Zurich to
mark the birth of Heinrich Bullinger, Swiss Reformer and successor (Der
Nachfolger) to Huldrych Zwingli after the latter’s death at the battle of Kap-
pel in 1531. Bullinger served as Antistes (Chief Pastor) of the Church of Zu-
rich from that date until his own death in 1575, thus ensuring that he would
stand as a ﬁgure of continuity through the manifold upheavals, both theo-
logical and political, of the mid-sixteenth century. For an English-speaking
audience it is perhaps worth noting that Bullinger’s life-span coincides exact-
ly with that of Matthew Parker (also 1504–1575), the ﬁrst reformed Arch-
bishop of Canterbury under Elizabeth Tudor. Bullinger was among the most
inﬂuential of all sixteenth-century Protestant reformers of the second gener-
ation. As the author of the Second Helvetic Confession he formulated what is
agreed to be the most signiﬁcant and lasting international standard of Re-
formed doctrinal orthodoxy. Throughout his long career Bullinger sustained
a vast correspondence with adherents of religious reform throughout Eu-
rope. So it was highly appropriate that among the highlights of the quincen-
tenary festivities there should be an International Congress hosted by The
Institute for Swiss Reformation History at the University of Zurich and at-
tended by a sizable contingent of scholars from across the globe: from Ger-
many, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Hungary, England, Scotland, Ca-
nada,  the  United  States,  and  beyond.  The  Congress,  titled  ‹Heinrich
Bullinger (1504–1575): Life, Thought, Inﬂuence› enjoyed the most generous
hospitality of the community of scholars of the Schola Tigurina, the Institute
for Swiss Reformation History, the Zwingliverein, and the Council of Zu-
rich itself over the space of four days at the end of August 2004. Those in at-
tendance gathered daily to hear more than sixty learned contributions, some
of them major lectures and others shorter papers. A great many aspects of
Bullinger’s life, thought, and inﬂuence were addressed, and a sizable number
of these, as might be expected, took up his voluminous theological œuvre.
Bullinger was particularly famous for his ﬁve ‹Decades› of sermons, which
stand beside Calvin’s Institutes of the Christian Religion and the Common-
places of Peter Martyr Vermigli as one of the most distinguished and inﬂuen-
tial contributions to Reformed theology in the sixteenth century.

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

107

Summary of Papers

Torrance Kirby

1. Lyle D. Bierma, Professor of Systematic Theology at Calvin Theological
Seminary in Grand Rapids, Michigan, addressed the systematic character of
Bullinger’s theology in his paper «Bullinger’s Inﬂuence upon the Heidelberg
Catechism.»  Bierma  demonstrated  that  Bullinger  has  long  competed  with
Calvin and Melanchthon for the distinction of theological father of the Hei-
delberg Catechism, the widely used method of instruction in the principles
of the Christian religion. Bullinger had frequent contacts with Heidelberg in
the course of the Reformation in the Palatinate, and played a part in training
Zacharias  Ursinus,  principal  author  of  the  Catechism.  Bullinger’s  protégé
Thomas Erastus was also a member of the Catechism drafting committee.
Moreover,  another  joint-author  of  the  Catechism,  Caspar  Olevianus,  tes-
tiﬁes to the assistance of the Swiss reformers in the drafting. Internal textual
evidence  of  Bullinger’s  role  is  more  ambiguous.  The  Catechism,  however,
does not promote any of the distinctive features of Bullinger’s Eucharistic
doctrine nor does it reject distinctively Calvinist and Melanchthonian fea-
tures. Bierma concluded that while the inﬂuence of Bullinger on the Cat-
echism cannot be doubted, identifying precisely where in the text that in-
ﬂuence can be found is very difﬁcult indeed. (Perhaps this very anonymity is
itself Bullinger’s peculiar mark and a subtle contributing factor to the Cat-
echism’s long-term success.)
2. Jean-Pierre Delville, professeur à la Faculté de Théologie, Louvain-la-
Neuve, offered a paper on the theme of scriptural hermeneutics: «Bullinger
et l’exégèse d’une parabole (1542): une comparaison avec ses contemporains»
and chose as a particular example the reformer’s commentary on Matthew
20: 1–16, the parable of the workers in the vineyard. Delville shows that Bul-
linger’s approach manifests a synthesis of tendencies in sixteenth-century ex-
egetical  practice.  Bullinger  integrated  the  complete  Latin  text  of  Erasmus
into  his  commentary  and  explicitly  identiﬁes  his  hermeneutical  approach
with Luther’s. Delville argued that Bullinger’s orientation appears «plus pas-
torale que polémique» and, moreover, that this approach aims ultimately at
the inward conversion of the reader. Bullinger deliberately avoids the po-
lemical  tone  employed  by  other  Protestant  exegetes  such  as,  for  example,
Melanchthon and Bucer and thus the Zuricher manifests «une côté plus iré-
niste et plus humaniste.» Delville concluded by noting Bullinger’s marked in-
ﬂuence on the exegetical technique of Musculus, Estienne, Calvin, Marlorat,
Guilliaud and Jansenius.
3. Dr. Mark Elliott, a Teaching Fellow in Church History at St Mary’s Col-
lege, University of St. Andrews in Scotland, addressed the theme of Bullin-
ger’s exegesis in his paper «Biblical commentary and the prophetic covenant

108

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

in  Bullinger,  with  reference  to  Oecolampadius,»  the  Basel  preacher  who
worked with Erasmus on the Greek New Testament and who became a close
associate of Zwingli. Elliott noted that in the exegesis of Oecolampadius the
notion of testament is superimposed on that of ‹foedus› or covenant. Like
Oecolampadius,  Bullinger  emphasizes  the  unity  of  the  covenant.  He  saw
prophetical texts in their most signiﬁcant aspect as pointing forward not to a
new covenant per se, but rather to a new mode of the one eternal covenant.
On this view, Isaiah for Bullinger is an apostle and an evangelist as much as he
is a prophet. Bullinger did not hold that the covenant’s conditions on the side
of the believer were easily fulﬁlled. Attempting obedience to the law, there-
fore, is properly to be understood as doing penance for spiritual dereliction
rather than as a positive contribution to salvation. Methodologically, Bul-
linger  follows  Oecolampadius  in  establishing  the  foundations  of  his  doc-
trinal formulations in biblical commentary.
4. Dr. Mark Taplin, a scholar from Edinburgh, Scotland, spoke on the rad-
ical challenge to Trinitarian orthodoxy faced directly by Bullinger in his
paper «Orthodoxy and dissent in Bullinger’s Zurich: the case of Bernardino
Ochino.» While scholars remain divided over this famous Italian evangeli-
cal’s theological position – some see him as a fundamentally orthodox re-
former, while others associate him with more radical currents of thought –
Taplin sought in his paper to identify areas of tension between Ochino and
an emerging Reformed orthodoxy, with particular reference to his treatment
of the doctrine of the Trinity, the relationship between justiﬁcation and sanc-
tiﬁcation, the punishment of heretics, as well as to Ochino’s infamous ‹dia-
logue on polygamy.› Bullinger’s support for the decision to dismiss Ochino
reﬂected his awareness of the threat to Reformed unity posed by the activity
of ‹heretics› and provides clear evidence of a marked shift in his approach to
the handling of theological dissidents by the instrument of requiring assent
to fundamental doctrine in addition to outward religious conformity. Taplin
concluded with the reﬂection that Bullinger’s critique of Ochino’s teachings
contributed signiﬁcantly to the latter’s posthumous reputation as a religious
radical and anti-trinitarian.
5. Willem van t’Spijker, Professor of Church History and Canon Law at the
Theologische Universiteit at Apeldoorn in the Netherlands, took up one of
the central themes of Bullinger scholarship, namely «Bullinger as a Covenant
Theologian.» Can Bullinger be adequately described as a covenant theolo-
gian, van t’Spijker asked? How, moreover, does the conception of covenant
function in his theology as a whole? He emphasized the importance of the
early Church Fathers, of medieval theology, and also of the Anabaptists with
their own contrary consideration of covenant and baptism, in the shaping
and development of Bullinger’s own position and went on to compare this

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

109

Torrance Kirby

stance to the formulations of Zwingli, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Capito, Cella-
rius, and Calvin. The impact of Melanchthon in particular on the thinking of
the covenant theologians of the second and third generation raises the ques-
tion whether one can speak of an unimpeded development or, alternatively,
of a distinct change in the course of Reformed theology. Taking into con-
sideration the interwoven character of thought on the covenant in Germany,
the Netherlands and Scotland, as well as within later pietism and Puritanism,
van  t’Spijker  then  asked  which  speciﬁc  elements  of  Bullinger’s  covenant
theology could be traced back, and how far back. Bullinger’s special role in
the deﬁnition of the so-called tertium genus of Reformation history is closely
implicated in his theology of the covenant. Professor van t’Spijker concluded
his lecture by highlighting aspects of Bullinger’s covenant theology which
have  had  lasting  consequence  for  contemporary  questions  concerning  the
church and theology.
6. W. P. Stephens, sometime Professor of Church History and Dean of the
Faculty of Divinity at the University of Aberdeen, compared Bullinger with
Zwingli on the question of Predestination. While many stress the continuity
between Zwingli and Bullinger, Professor Stephens argued that careful study
reveals signiﬁcant differences both in their respective presentations of pre-
destination and its role in their own theologies, not least in relation to bap-
tism.  Both  relate  predestination  to  providence,  both  emphasize  election
rather than reprobation, both have a strong sense of the problems raised by
the doctrine, and hence both show some reserve in expounding it. Zwingli’s
fundamental use of predestination is to afﬁrm God’s sovereignty in salvation.
Bullinger stresses the inscrutability of God’s counsels. And whereas Zwingli
develops predestination in the context of controversy, Bullinger is inclined to
see the doctrine as itself a source of controversy. Bullinger would appear to
hold ‹double› predestination, yet rarely expresses this position and always
qualiﬁes it, and therefore rejects ‹curious questions› while pointing to what
God has revealed both of Himself and his will. Bullinger’s presentation is al-
ways Christological in emphasis: election is ‹in Christ›. Responsibility for
lack of faith is not in God’s will but in the human will. God’s desire is for all
to be saved. Bullinger consistently opposes any suggestion that God is the
author of sin or evil and equally opposes any suggestion that we can be the
author of our salvation which is wholly dependent on divine agency. Unlike
Zwingli, Bullinger relates election positively to baptism, but does not give it a
signiﬁcant role in his defence of infant baptism.
7. Christoph  Strohm  holds  the  Lehrstuhl  für  Kirchengeschichte  in  the
Evangelisch-Theologische Fakultät, Ruhr-Universität Bochum, in Germany.
His keynote address was titled «Pauline-Johannine Soteriology: frontlines,
developments,  and  the  distinctiveness  of  Bullinger’s  doctrine  of Justiﬁ-

110

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

cation.» Strohm began by emphasizing that Bullinger’s doctrine of justiﬁ-
cation, by revealing the starting point, development, and distinctiveness of
his theology as a whole, provides something of a hermeneutical key to his
thought. The young Bullinger was as a student of Luther, who adhered to
what Strohm deﬁned as the «mystically-coloured desire,» and did so more
faithfully than Melanchthon, who – for the sake of a more methodically-or-
dered presentation – chooses to differentiate very precisely between justiﬁ-
cation  and  sanctiﬁcation,  and  understands  the  former  strictly  forensically.
The idea of justiﬁcation sola ﬁde for Bullinger, as for Luther, marks the pro-
ﬁle of Protestant Christianity decisively over against Rome and the radicals.
Unlike Luther, neither the differentiation between law and gospel nor the
forensic and effective iustiﬁcatio play a leading role for Bullinger. While Me-
lanchthon views the doctrine forensically in the interest of a clear distinction
between  justiﬁcation  and  sanctiﬁcation,  Bullinger  retains  Luther’s  mysti-
cally-marked idea of a «partaking» of the faithful in Christ’s righteousness.
Bullinger’s principal emphasis is on establishing people as subjects of good
actions through justiﬁcation: viviﬁcatio. With this, the differentiation of Bul-
linger’s position should be noted in all clarity over against the Roman Cath-
olic conception of justifying grace as a «habitus» which must increase.

8. Bruce Gordon, Reader in Modern History at the University of St An-
drews, Scotland, presented a major paper on eschatology and spirituality:
«The Four Last Things: Death, Judgement and the Afterlife in Bullinger’s
Spirituality.» With his famous sermons on the books of Daniel and Revel-
ation Bullinger established himself as one of the most important Reforma-
tion writers on the Apocalypse. Gordon began with an exploration of Bul-
linger’s  treatment  of  death  as  both  a  punishment  for  sin  and  a  desirable
liberation  from  the  world.  His  discourse  on  the  Last  Judgement  served
several concurrent purposes: it was a rhetorical means of warning the faithful
about God’s wrath; it was integral to Bullinger’s political negotiations with
the  magistrates;  and  it  revealed  Bullinger’s  mature  stance  as  a  prophetical
voice declaring unseen things. Following Zwingli and most other reformers,
Bullinger comprehensively rejected purgatory as a place of temporal punish-
ment. He insisted rather on immediate judgement following death. On hell,
in contrast, he had relatively little to say. Bullinger’s treatment of the topo-
graphy of the afterlife also reveals his continued attachment to the medieval
Aristotelian view of the cosmos and how this was to be incorporated into his
biblical message. Bullinger’s discussion of death and the afterlife was very
much directed towards the spirituality of the living. It provided the frame-
work for his pastoral message that Christian spirituality consists of the tradi-
tional stages of puriﬁcation, illumination and perfection – key terms in his
vocabulary. Increasingly Bullinger saw the purpose of life to be a good death

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

111

Torrance Kirby

and understood himself as having the prophetic responsibility of explaining
the  ﬁnal  things  to  the  people.  For  Gordon,  attention  to  both  Bullinger’s
understanding and his vocabulary of death and the afterlife provides a point
of entry to explore more fully the character of his distinctively Reformed
spirituality.
9. Herman Selderhuis, Professor of Church History and Church Polity at
the Theologische Universiteit, Apeldoorn, the Netherlands, addressed Bul-
linger’s doctrine of the church: «Kirche unter dem Kreuz: die Ekklesiologie
Heinrich Bullingers» [Church under the Cross: H. Bullinger’s Ecclesiology].
Selderhuis noted that research on Bullinger’s ecclesiology has been limited,
and for the most part restricted to the framework of the interaction between
the Church and the civil authority. As a result a static interpretation has in-
evitably emerged. An altogether different picture of his ecclesiology comes
into view on closer examination of his sermons on the Apocalypse. For Bul-
linger, the Apocalypse is above all about the church. Indeed for Bullinger the
central claim of this ﬁnal book of the New Testament is that Christ never will
leave the church here on earth. The Christian community needs this certainty
precisely because it is an earthly community. The suffering of the church as a
terrestrial community is fundamental to its existence until the ﬁnal return of
Christ as Judge. Until then the Church is threatened by princes who will seek
to hold sway over the church or threaten her with the sword. Another threat
comes from the Papacy and a third from heresy. On the theological plane,
Bullinger’s ecclesiology is determined ultimately by the principle of ‹commu-
nio cum Christo›. To be in communion with Christ is to share in his cross and
sorrows. This communion guarantees that Christ will continually attend and
care for the church as his bride. Communion with Christ also has conse-
quences for the relationship among the membership, for the future of the
church, and for the relation between faith and election. Selderhuis concluded
by noting the signiﬁcant absence of the covenant motif in Bullinger’s Ser-
mons on the Apocalypse. The principles of Bullinger’s ecclesiology ought to
be of high relevance to today’s Church.
10. Dr. Peter  Opitz  of  the  Institut  für  Schweizerische  Reformationsge-
schichte, University of Zurich, is editor of the new critical edition of Bullin-
ger’s theological writings (Dekaden). He contributed a major paper on the
key theme of Bullinger’s so-called ‹prophetical ofﬁce› under the title «Das
‹munus propheticum› bei Bullinger.» According to Opitz, the reformer is par-
ticularly remembered for having «consolidated» and «institutionalised» the
Reformation in Zurich, a process closely connected to his exercise of the pro-
phetical ofﬁce. In the Karlstagsrede of 1532, a speech delivered at the annual
festival on 28 January commemorating Charlemagne’s original endowment of
the Grossmunster, Bullinger compared his function to the prophetical ofﬁce

112

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

as originally formulated by his predecessor Zwingli, namely as a «servant of
the divine word» after the example of the Old Testament prophets. As such it
was his duty to announce ﬁrst and foremost the great reconciliation. For Bul-
linger prophecy was at the same time a pedagogical task. In preparation for
this all candidates for ministry in Zurich were required to take a theological
examination which included the rigorous testing of linguistic and other higher
academic attainments. In addition, through exercise of the prophetical ofﬁce
the reformed clergy became associates with the political authorities in gov-
ernance of the populace. Bullinger’s great achievement was both to preserve
and to transform Zwingli’s inheritance through the crises and upheaval from
the 1530s through the early 1570s.
11. Dr. Andreas Mühling, Lecturer in Church History at the University of
Luzern, presented an analysis of pastoral care in his paper «Bullinger als Seel-
sorger im Spiegel seiner Korrespondenz» [Bullinger as Pastor in the light of
his Correspondence]. Bullinger belonged to the company of the ﬁrst-gener-
ation  reformers  in  grounding  his  theological  account  of pastoral  care  on
late-medieval common-places. Through correct theological teaching as well
as the appropriate practice of piety, the people were enabled to ﬁnd their re-
lationship to the divine covenant. For Bullinger the pastoral duties of «teach-
ing, admonishing, encouraging and comforting» are to be read chieﬂy in the
context of pastoral care. In his ecclesiastical and political discourse Bullinger
was frequently moved by pastoral considerations towards his interlocutors.
His vast and diverse correspondence reveals a comprehensive understanding
of pastoral care ranging from marriage problems to confrontation with ill-
ness and death, family disputes, professional problems, as well as involved
political  situations.  Throughout  Christo-centrism  constitutes  the  basic
structure  of  Bullinger’s  conception  of  pastoral  care,  especially  on  matters
concerning life, suffering, and death. Indeed Bullinger’s strength and credi-
bility in pastoral conversation rely upon a refusal to conceal the very real
worries, pains, mortal fears, and even theological attacks suffered by Chris-
tians. Moreover, for Bullinger the responsibility of pastoral care is required
of all Christians. The Bible itself is the key instrument of advice within the
settled religious context of obedience and prayer on the one hand, and the
right administration of the sacraments on the other. Mühling concluded by
emphasizing the simultaneously theological and ethical character of Bulling-
er’s doctrine and practice of pastoral care.
12. Dr. Amy Burnett, Associate Professor of History, University of Ne-
braska (Lincoln), spoke on the subject «Heinrich Bullinger and the Problem
of Eucharistic Concord.» She began by observing that the correspondence of
Reformed church leaders in the years immediately following the Peace of
Augsburg  reveals  their  common  desire  for  eucharistic  concord  with  the

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

113

Torrance Kirby

churches of Germany. Yet it was the irenical Bullinger who alone opposed
the calling of a new religious colloquy among Protestants to address the doc-
trine of the Eucharist. He was opposed to any concord with those who re-
garded his predecessor Zwingli as a heretic. Moreover, he refused to accept
any statement on the sacrament that did not reﬂect «the simplicity of the
truth» concerning the Lord’s Supper. To fundamental concerns dating from
the early 1530s Bullinger added new objections that grew out of the events of
the two decades between the Wittenberg Concord (1536) and the Peace of
Augsburg (1555). First and foremost was his fear that re-opening the debate
would cause disunity among the Swiss churches, a fear based on his observa-
tion of Bucer’s inﬂuence in Switzerland during the later 1530s and 1540s. The
renewal of eucharistic controversy in the early 1550s only strengthened his
conviction that the Gnesio-Lutherans would allow no compromise with the
Reformed on the issue of the Lord’s Supper. Finally, Bullinger recognized
that there could be no satisfactory resolution to the dilemma posed by his re-
jection of the Augsburg Confession owing to the political signiﬁcance given
to that Confession by the Peace of Augsburg.

13. Dr. Carrie Euler, Department of History, Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, addressed Bullinger’s practical divinity in her paper «Practical
Piety: Bullinger’s Marriage Theology as a Skillful Blending of Theory and
Praxis.» Euler argued that Bullinger’s theology of marriage, particularly his
presentation of it in Der Christlich Eestand (1540), is indicative of a strong
commitment to the practical application of evangelical principles among the
laity.  She  suggested,  more  generally,  that  much  of  Bullinger’s  success  as  a
church leader and «architect of Reformation» both at home and abroad was
owing to this skilful blending of theology with practical advice. While Bul-
linger’s book on marriage provides perhaps the best example of his pragma-
tism, it is also visible in other of his writings and in his actions as leader of the
Zurich church. Bullinger builds on the premise of a direct and intimate rela-
tionship between morality and doctrine. His intention was to demonstrate
«that wedloke maye well proceade and be kepte, & that nothinge be done
amysse thorow ignorance or evel custome, or for fault of doctryne.» More-
over, his extensive advice on the relationship between husbands and wives,
their domestic duties, and the rearing of children reveals a sincere desire to
integrate  religious  and  moral  reform  into  the  daily  lives  of  the  people.
Dr. Euler also adduced evidence of this phenomenon outside of Bullinger’s
marriage theology. She discussed his use of the covenant metaphor to justify
and explain the application of Old Testament law to Christian society, his
composition  of  educational  and  devotional  writings  (such  as Bericht  der
Kranken and Summa Christenlicher Religion), and his working relationship
with the Zurich city council.

114

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

14. Michael  Baumann,  Institut  für  Schweizerische  Reformationsge-
schichte, University of Zurich, turned the spotlight onto Bullinger’s political
theology in his paper «Heinrich Bullinger, Peter Martyr Vermigli und das
Verständnis der Obrigkeit: ein Vergleich ihrer Auffassung von Obrigkeit»
[H. Bullinger, P. M. Vermigli and the understanding of Authority: a compari-
son of their conceptions of Authority]. In his activity as senior Minister and
Antistes of Zurich, Bullinger presents a variegated picture of the responsibil-
ities of civil authority. In his understanding the power of this authority is di-
vinely derived: «all power comes from God.» Thus the civic authorities are to
be regarded as «Hausväter,» princes, even «gods» (elohim) and governors in
the administration of justice. Obedience is owed to such authority owing to
its divine origin, however it could lead simultaneously back into bondage.
Movements for emancipation became noticeable within the municipal regi-
ment prior to Bullinger’s taking ofﬁce. There is evidence in autumn 1531, for
example, of the emergence of at least a theoretical acceptance of the possibil-
ity of resistance against the authorities. For Bullinger it was clear that «state»
and «church» concerns represent distinct points of view yet both arise out of
congruent  areas,  that  is  to  say  civic  and  ecclesiastical  concerns  behave
«concentrically». In short, the Ministry and the Magistracy pursue certain
common ends and goals. Baumann then sought to show that what Bullinger
developed  on  a  practical  and  theoretical  level  ﬁnds  its  corresponding
counterpart in Peter Martyr Vermigli’s Old Testament exegesis. In his com-
mentaries on the books of Samuel and Kings, Vermigli develops a theoretical
Republicanism avant la lettre, detached from the immediate political con-
cerns of Zurich, and yet simultaneously quite intensely connected with an
emergent republican ideal. In his idealized analysis of the ancient kingdom of
Israel Vermigli links the aspect of the divine claim to order all aspects of life
with the proclamation of the faith itself. It is not only in the quotidien life of
the Church but on the conceptual level as well that Bullinger and Vermigli
prove to be in substantive mutual agreement.

15. Torrance Kirby, associate professor of Church History at McGill Uni-
versity in Montreal, addressed a speciﬁc application of Bullinger’s theology of
the Magistracy in a monarchical setting in his treatment of «The Civil Magis-
trate and the ‹cura religionis›: Heinrich Bullinger’s prophetical ofﬁce and the
English  Reformation.»  Kirby  employed  one  of  Bullinger’s  preferred  cat-
egories and suggested that Bullinger’s distinctive role with respect to the ref-
ormation of the Church of England is perhaps best described as «prophetical»
(see Opitz above). By means of the translation of his works into English,
through epistles dedicatory, and through an extensive correspondence, Bul-
linger extended the exercise of his prophetical ofﬁce to include the realm of
England. Given the scope of this inﬂuence and its remarkable consistency

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

115

Torrance Kirby

over more than forty years, Bullinger assumed his place among the ﬁrst rank
of reformers of the English Church. Indeed it is arguable that no other divine
exercised a comparable degree of continuous inﬂuence over all of the principal
stages of the English Reformation – from the Henrician and Edwardine re-
forms, through the crucible of the Marian exile, to the eventual implemen-
tation and consolidation of the Elizabethan religious settlement. At every
stage Bullinger was engaged as a signiﬁcant player, and in later years was fre-
quently appealed to as an arbiter of internal disputes and even as a public
apologist of the Church of England on the international stage. Bullinger lays a
fair claim to being a theologian par excellence of the reformed Church of Eng-
land. Throughout the forty-odd years of his support of the cause of religious
reform in England, one recurrent theme of his discourse stands out among the
rest, and that concerns the very pre-eminence of the civil magistrate’s au-
thority in what Bullinger refers to as «cura religionis». In short, the proposal
put forward is that Heinrich Bullinger’s distinctive contribution to the Eng-
lish Reformation was to be a prophet of the Royal Supremacy.

16. John Craig is associate professor in the Department of History at Simon
Fraser University in Vancouver. Craig began the presentation of his research
on «Heinrich Bullinger and the early modern English parish» by afﬁrming
the importance of Bullinger’s international inﬂuence in general and upon
the English reformed church in particular. The latter fact is captured most
clearly in the extensive correspondence he maintained with numerous Eliza-
bethan bishops (many of them guests of Bullinger while in exile under Queen
Mary) but also in the way in which his writings were translated into English.
Craig examined the popular responses to two of Bullinger’s works in English
translation: the ‹Decades› or Fiftie Godlie and Learned Sermons (1577) and
Sermons  on  the  Apocalypse  (1561).  He  then  proceeded  to  compare  the
responses to these texts among the clergy and people, for both works had
received a certain amount of episcopal approval. The Elizabethan bishops
sought in the 1570s and ’80s to use the Decades as a key text for clerical in-
struction. What were the reasons for these initiatives by the bishops and for
the  responses  to  them?  By  appealing  to  data  about  books  purchased  and
owned by parish communities in the counties of Cambridgeshire, Suffolk,
Hertfordshire and Devon with a sampling from London parishes, Craig ar-
gued that the attempt to establish Bullinger’s Decades as an inﬂuential text of
the Elizabethan church failed. Few parishes ever purchased this work and
other texts such as English translations of Calvin’s Institutes, Peter Martyr’s
Commonplaces, or the Commonplaces of Wolfgang Musculus appear to have
been more common.

116

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

Heinrich Bullinger (1504–1575): Life - Thought - Inﬂuence

17. Dr. Christine Stuber of Bern continued the theme of Nachleben in her
treatment of «The Inﬂuence of the Second Helvetic Confession in Switzer-
land from the sixteenth through the nineteenth centuries» [Zur Wirkungsge-
schichte der Confessio Helvetica Posterior in der Schweiz (16.–19. Jh.)]. For
Stuber the Second Helvetic Confession stands as the theological connecting
link, as it were, among the Reformed churches of the Swiss Confederacy.
This Confession became the authoritative mandate deﬁning the catechism
and  served  as  an  instrument  of  discipline  to  defrock  or  punish  refractory
ministers. Through the catechism the Confession inﬂuenced religious and
ethical life. The teaching of the Second Helvetic Confession was very strongly
scriptural. In 1675 the Helvetic Consensus Formula would provide an ex-
planatory elaboration of the Confession. This new formula, however, was un-
able to maintain its authority for long on account of the degree to which Sec-
ond Helvetic had already become established and well-rooted in the church.
Stuber raised the question whether the Second Helvetic Confession may have
contributed to the widespread practice of Swiss ministers wishing all biblical
statements  might  stand  alone  without  appeals  to  dogmatic  precision.  The
second article of the Confession maintains the necessity on the part of sub-
scribers  to  dissent  from  any  interpretations  of  Scripture  «when  they  are
found to set down things differing from, or altogether contrary to, the Scrip-
tures.» Since 1706 many Vaudois candidates for ordination have afﬁrmed the
Consensus Formula with the added words «quatenus cum verbo Dei consen-
tit» or «so far as the teaching of the Consensus agrees with the holy writ,» and
this contrary to the direction of the Bernese authorities.

The Second Helvetic Confession became the international standard of be-
lief for many of the Reformed churches and also became a key frame of re-
ference for new doctrinal departures. In 1819 Genevan adherents of the piet-
ist Awakening printed the Confession as an expression of their faith and as a
joint confession with the churches of Switzerland. In addition, the Bernese
revivalist minister, Antoine Galland, sought to establish the movement’s re-
spectability by an appeal to the authority of the Second Helvetic Confession.

Prof. Dr. Torrance Kirby, Montreal

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

117

Torrance Kirby

118

Zwingliana XXXII, 2005

